


   Final Cut Express
  
  was a
  
   video editing software
  
  suite, now discontinued, created by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  It was the consumer version of
  
   Final Cut Pro
  
  and was designed for advanced editing of
  
   digital video
  
  as well as
  
   high-definition video
  
  , which was used by many amateur and professional
  
   videographers
  
  . Final Cut Express was considered a step above
  
   iMovie
  
  in terms of capabilities, but a step underneath Final Cut Pro and its suite of applications. As of June 21, 2011, Final Cut Express was discontinued, in favor of
  
   Final Cut Pro X
  
  .
  

    [1]
   




  Final Cut Express 1.0, based on
  
   Final Cut Pro
  
  3, was released at
  
   Macworld Conference and Expo
  
  in
  
   San Francisco
  
  in 2003. The second version, based on Final Cut Pro 4, was released at Macworld San Francisco in 2004. The third version, capable of editing
  
   high definition video
  
  , was also announced at Macworld San Francisco a year later, and was released as Final Cut Express HD in February 2005. It was based on Final Cut Pro HD (version 4.5) and included LiveType 1.2 and Soundtrack 1.2.
 
  Final Cut Express version 3.5 was released with little fanfare in May 2006 as a
  
   Universal Binary
  
  . In addition to improving
  
   real-time rendering
  
  with Dynamic RT, version 3.5 upgraded LiveType to version 2.0 and Soundtrack to version 1.5.
 
  In November 2007, Apple released Final Cut Express 4, which although it did not support real-time editing in the
  
   AVCHD
  
  format (it only allowed for transcoding AVCHD to Apple Intermediate Codec (AIC) provided that the camera was actually attached to the computer - it did not convert AVCHD files stored elsewhere and is currently for Intel processors only), imported iMovie '08 projects and included 50 new filters. It did not include Soundtrack 1.5, but it still included
  
   LiveType
  
  which enables users to create advanced text for the movies they created in Final Cut. The price was dropped from $299 for version 3.5 to $199 for version 4.0.
 
  In June 2011, Final Cut Express was officially discontinued, in favor of Final Cut Pro X.
 
  Final Cut Express' interface was identical to that of
  
   Final Cut Pro
  
  , but lacks some film-specific features, including
  
   Cinema Tools
  
  , multi-cam editing, batch capture, and a
  
   time code
  
  view. The program performed 32 undo operations, while Final Cut Pro did 99
  
   [2]
  
  .
 
  Features
  

    [2]
   

  the program did include were:
 
  One feature of Final Cut Express that was not available in Final Cut Pro is the ability to import
  
   iMovie '08
  
  projects (though transitions are not preserved).
  

    [3]
   


  Inherited from Final Cut Pro, Final Cut Express features RT Extreme, which allows previews of some
  
   video filters
  
  and transitions without rendering. Audio that is not in the native
  
   AIFF
  
  file format needs rendering before it can be played back. RT Extreme has three modes: 'Safe', for seeing multiple video layers at a quality that more or less guarantees a smooth playback; 'Unlimited', which allows the maximum number of composited video layers to be viewed at the same time; and 'Dynamic', which alternates between these settings depending on how many simultaneous video tracks are present.
  
   Frame dropping
  
  may result from using 'Unlimited' on low-resource machines.
 
  Like Final Cut Pro, Express also comes with
  
   Boris
  
  Calligraphy, a plugin for advanced titling and scrolling/crawling titles more sophisticated than the ones that can be created with the built-in title overlays. Calligraphy has a
  
   WYSIWYG
  
  interface and features wrapping, alignment, leading, kerning and tracking features, as well as allowing up to five custom outlines and five custom
  
   drop shadows
  
  to be defined for a selected portion of the title.
 
  Prior to version 4, Final Cut Express included Soundtrack 1.5, a music program similar to the consumer-level
  
   GarageBand
  
  , but designed for videographers who wish to add music to their films. Soundtrack comes with around 4,000 professionally recorded instrument loops and sound effects that can be arranged in multiple tracks beneath the video track.
 
  To use Soundtrack, users export their Final Cut Express sequence, or a marked portion thereof, as a reference file, which can include scoring markers defined in the timeline. This reference file can be imported as the video track in Soundtrack.
 
  Soundtrack is functionally and visually identical to Soundtrack Pro's multitrack editing mode, but includes fewer Logic plugins and lacks the highly regarded noise removal tool.
 
  Soundtrack was removed from Final Cut Express 4, which lowered its price and may have encouraged people to buy Logic Express.
 