


   Rhapsody
  
  was the code name given to
  
   Apple Computer
  
  's next-generation
  
   operating system
  
  during the period of its development between Apple's purchase of
  
   NeXT
  
  in late 1996 and the announcement of
  
   Mac OS X
  
  in 1998. It consisted primarily of the
  
   OPENSTEP
  
  operating system ported to the
  
   Power Mac
  
  along with a new GUI to make it appear more Mac-like. Several existing
  
   "classic" Mac OS
  
  technologies were also ported to Rhapsody, including
  
   QuickTime
  
  and
  
   AppleSearch
  
  . Rhapsody could also run
  
   Mac OS 8
  
  in a "Blue Box" emulation layer.
 


  Rhapsody was announced at the
  
   MacWorld Expo
  
  in San Francisco on January 7, 1997
  

    [1]
   

  and first demonstrated at the 1997
  
   Worldwide Developers Conference
  
  (WWDC). There were two subsequent general Developer Releases for computers with
  
   Intel x86
  
  or
  
   PowerPC
  
  processors. After this there was to be a "Premier" version somewhat analogous to the
  
   Mac OS X Public Beta
  
  , followed by the full "Unified" version in the second quarter of 1998. Apple's development schedule in integrating the features of two very different systems made it difficult to forecast the features of upcoming releases. At the 1998
  
   MacWorld Expo
  
  in
  
   New York
  
  ,
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  announced that Rhapsody would be released as
  
   Mac OS X Server 1.0
  
  (which shipped in 1999). No home version of Rhapsody would be released. Its
  
   code base
  
  was
  
   forked
  
  into
  
   Darwin
  
  , the
  
   open source
  
  underpinnings of Mac OS X.
 
  Defining features of the Rhapsody operating system included the
  
   Mach microkernel
  
  , a
  
   BSD
  
  operating system layer (based on
  
   4.4BSD
  
  ), the object-oriented
  
   Yellow Box
  
  API framework, the
  
   Blue Box
  
  compatibility environment for running
  
   "classic" Mac OS
  
  applications, and a
  
   Java Virtual Machine
  
  .
 
  The user interface was modeled after
  
   Mac OS 8
  
  's "Platinum" appearance. The file management functions served by the
  
   Finder
  
  in previous Mac OS versions were instead handled by a port of
  
   OPENSTEP
  
  's Workspace Manager. Additional features inherited from OPENSTEP and not found in the classic Mac OS Finder were included, such as the
  
   Shelf
  
  and
  
   column view
  
  . Although the Shelf was dropped in favor of
  
   Dock
  
  functionality, column view would later make its way to
  
   Mac OS X
  
  's Finder.
 
  Rhapsody's Blue Box environment, available only when running on the
  
   PowerPC
  
  architecture, was responsible for providing runtime compatibility with existing Mac OS applications. Compared to the more streamlined and integrated Classic compatibility layer that was later featured in Mac OS X, Blue Box's interface presented users with a distinct barrier between emulated legacy software and native Rhapsody applications. All emulated applications and their associated windows were encapsulated within a single Blue Box emulation window instead of being interspersed with the other applications using the native Yellow Box API. This limited cross-environment interoperability and caused various user interface inconsistencies.
 
  To avoid the pitfalls of running within the emulation environment and take full advantage of Rhapsody's features, software needed to be rewritten to use the new Yellow Box API. Inherited from OPENSTEP, Yellow Box used an object-oriented model completely unlike the
  
   procedural
  
  model used by the Classic APIs. The large difference between the two frameworks meant transition of legacy code required significant changes and effort on the part of the developer. The consequent lack of adoption as well as objections by prominent figures in the Macintosh software market, including
  
   Adobe Systems
  
  and
  
   Microsoft
  
  , became major factors in Apple's decision to cancel the Rhapsody project in 1998.
  

    [2]
   


  However, most of Yellow Box and other Rhapsody technologies went on to be used in Mac OS X's
  
   Cocoa API
  
  . Bowing to developers' wishes, Apple also ported existing Classic Mac OS technologies into the new operating system and implemented the
  
   Carbon API
  
  to provide Classic Mac OS API compatibility. Widely used Mac OS libraries like
  
   QuickTime
  
  and
  
   AppleScript
  
  were ported and made available to developers. Carbon allowed developers to maintain full compatibility and native functionality using their current codebases, while enabling them to take advantage of new features at their discretion.
 
  The name
  
   Rhapsody
  
  followed a pattern of music-related code names that Apple designated for operating system releases during the 1990s. Another next-generation operating system, which was to be the successor to the never-completed
  
   Copland
  
  operating system, was code-named Gershwin after
  
   George Gershwin
  
  , composer of
  
   Rhapsody in Blue
  
  . Copland itself was named after another
  
   American
  
  composer,
  
   Aaron Copland
  
  . Other musical code names include Harmony (
  
   Mac OS 7.6
  
  ), Tempo (
  
   Mac OS 8
  
  ), Allegro (
  
   Mac OS 8.5
  
  ), and Sonata (
  
   Mac OS 9
  
  ).
 