


   iTunes
  
  (
  


     /
     

       ˈ
      

       aɪ
      

       tj
      

       uː
      

       n
      

       z
      

     /
    


  or
  


     /
     

       ˈ
      

       aɪ
      

       t
      

       uː
      

       n
      

       z
      

     /
    


  )
  

    [4]
   

  is a
  
   media player
  
  , media library,
  
   online radio
  
  broadcaster, and
  
   mobile device
  
  management application developed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  It is used to play, download, and organize
  
   digital downloads
  
  of music and video (as well as other types of media available on the
  
   iTunes Store
  
  ) on personal computers running the
  
   macOS
  
  and
  
   Microsoft Windows
  
  operating systems. The
  
   iTunes Store
  
  is also available on the
  
   iPhone
  
  ,
  
   iPad
  
  , and
  
   iPod Touch
  
  .
 
  Through the
  
   iTunes Store
  
  , users can purchase and download music, music videos, television shows,
  
   audiobooks
  
  ,
  
   podcasts
  
  , movies, and movie rentals in some countries, and
  
   ringtones
  
  , available on the iPhone and iPod Touch (fourth generation onward).
  
   Application software
  
  for the iPhone, iPad and iPod Touch can be downloaded from the
  
   App Store
  
  . iTunes 12.5 is the most recent major version of iTunes, available for Mac OS X v10.9.5 or later and
  
   Windows 7
  
  or later; it was released on September 13, 2016.
  

    [5]
   

  iTunes 12.2 added
  
   Apple Music
  
  to the application, along with the
  
   Beats 1
  
  radio station, and iTunes 12.5 offers a refinement of the Apple Music interface.
 



   SoundJam MP
  
  , developed by
  
   Bill Kincaid
  
  and released by
  
   Casady & Greene
  
  in 1998,
  

    [6]
   

  was renamed iTunes when
  
   Apple
  
  purchased it in 2000. Jeff Robbin, Kincaid, and Dave Heller moved to
  
   Apple
  
  as part of the acquisition, where they continue to work today as the software's original developers. They simplified SoundJam's user interface, added the ability to burn CDs, and removed its recording feature and
  
   skin
  
  support.
  

    [7]
   

  On January 9, 2001, iTunes 1.0 was released at
  
   Macworld
  
  San Francisco.
  

    [8]
   


  Originally a
  
   Mac OS 9
  
  -only application, iTunes began to support Mac OS X when version 2.0 was released nine months later, which also added support for the original
  
   iPod
  
  .
  

    [9]
   

  Version 3 dropped Mac OS 9 support but added smart
  
   playlists
  
  and a ratings system.
  

    [10]
   

  In April 2003, version 4.0 introduced the
  
   iTunes Store
  
  ; in October, version 4.1 added support for
  
   Microsoft Windows 2000
  
  and
  
   Windows XP
  
  .
  

    [11]
   

  Introduced at Macworld 2005 with the new
  
   iPod Shuffle
  
  , Version 4.7.1 introduced the ability to automatically convert higher-bitrate songs to 128kbit/s
  
   AAC
  
  as these devices did not natively support audio encoded in
  
   AIFF
  
  or
  
   Apple Lossless
  
  formats, also improving the
  
   value proposition
  
  of the Shuffle's limited
  
   flash-only storage
  
  .
  

    [12]
   

  Version 7.0 introduced
  
   gapless playback
  
  and
  
   Cover Flow
  
  in September 2006.
  

    [13]
   

  In March 2007, iTunes 7.1 added support for
  
   Windows Vista
  
  ,
  

    [14]
   

  and 7.3.2 was the last Windows 2000 version.
  

    [15]
   

  iTunes lacked support for
  
   64-bit
  
  versions of Windows until the 7.6 update on January 16, 2008. iTunes is supported under any 64-bit version of Windows Vista, although the iTunes executable is still
  
   32-bit
  
  . The 64-bit versions of
  
   Windows XP
  
  and
  
   Windows Server 2003
  
  are not supported by
  
   Apple
  
  , but a workaround has been devised for both operating systems.
  

    [16]
   

  Version 8.0 added
  
   Genius
  
  playlists, grid view, and a new default
  
   visualizer
  
  .
  

    [17]
   

  iTunes 9 added "Homeshare", enabling automatic updating of purchased items across other computers on the same
  
   subnet
  
  and offers a new iTunes Store
  
   UI
  
  .
  
   Genius Mixes
  
  were added, as well as improved app synchronization abilities, extending the iPod Shuffle 128 kbit/s down-convert feature to all of Apple's AAC-capable devices.
  

    [18]
   

  It also adds
  
   iTunes LPs
  
  to the store, which provides additional media with an album. Apple added
  
   iTunes Extras
  
  as well to the store, which adds content usually reserved for films on
  
   DVD
  
  and
  
   Blu-ray
  
  discs.
  

    [19]
   

  Both iTunes LPs and Extras use web-standards
  
   HTML
  
  ,
  
   JavaScript
  
  and
  
   CSS
  
  .
  

    [20]
   


  iTunes acts as a front end for Apple's
  
   QuickTime
  
  media framework.
  

    [21]
   

  Officially, it is required in order to manage the audio data of an iPod, iPhone, or iPad, although
  
   alternative software
  
  does exist. Users can organize their music into
  
   playlists
  
  within one or more libraries, edit file information, record
  
   Compact Discs
  
  , copy files to a
  
   digital audio player
  
  , purchase music and videos through its built-in music store (
  
   iTunes Store
  
  ), download free
  
   podcasts
  
  , back up songs onto a CD or DVD, run a visualizer to display graphical effects in time to the music, and encode music into a number of different audio formats.
  

    [22]
   


  In addition, users are able to add PDF files to their library.
  

    [22]
   

  The PDFs can be synchronized with and read on several devices except the regular iPod.
  

    [22]
   



    [23]
   

  iTunes 8.0 saw the removal of several options in the
  
   Preferences
  
  window. For example, iTunes once gave users the option to display arrows beside the selected song's title, artist, album, and genre that link directly to the iTunes Store. These arrows are no longer removable, except through the direct editing of a preferences file.
  

    [24]
   


  iTunes keeps track of songs by creating a virtual library, allowing users to access and edit a song's attributes. These attributes, known as
  
   metadata
  
  , are stored in a binary library file called
  
   iTunes Library
  
  , which uses a proprietary file format ("ITL"). It caches information like artist and genre from the audio format's tag capabilities (the
  
   ID3
  
  tag, for example) and stores iTunes-specific information like play count and rating. iTunes typically reads library data only from this file.
  

    [25]
   

  A second file can also be created if users activate a preference; the
  
   iTunes Music Library.xml
  
  file is refreshed whenever information in iTunes is changed. It uses an
  
   XML
  
  format, allowing third-party apps to access the library information (including play count, last played date, and rating, which are not standard fields in the ID3v2.3 format). Apple's own
  
   iDVD
  
  ,
  
   iMovie
  
  , and
  
   iPhoto
  
  applications all access the library.
  

    [26]
   

  If the first file exists but is corrupted, such as by making it zero-length, iTunes will attempt to reconstruct it from the XML file. Detailed third-party instructions regarding this can be found elsewhere.
  

    [27]
   

  Beginning with iTunes 10.5.3 this behavior has been changed such that the XML file is not read automatically to recreate the database when the database is corrupted. Rather, the user should load the iTunes Library.xml file via File > Library > Import Playlist....
 
  It has also been noted that iTunes does not automatically track changes to actual files in the library. If a file is moved or deleted, iTunes will display an
  
   exclamation mark
  
  beside the library entry and the user will need to manually amend the library record. Several
  
   third party tools
  
  address this problem.
  

    [28]
   


  iTunes supports
  
   ripping
  
  from CDs, but not from DVDs. However, in 2008, Apple and select film studios introduced "iTunes
  
   Digital Copy
  
  ", a bonus feature on some DVDs that provides a copy-protected and iTunes-compatible file for select films.
  

    [29]
   


  iTunes can read, write and convert between
  
   MP3
  
  ,
  
   AIFF
  
  ,
  
   WAV
  
  ,
  
   MPEG-4
  
  ,
  
   AAC
  
  and
  
   Apple Lossless
  
  (
  
   .m4a
  
  ).
  

    [30]
   


  iTunes can also play any audio files that
  
   QuickTime
  
  can play (as well as some video formats), including
  
   Protected AAC
  
  files from the iTunes Store and
  
   Audible.com
  
  audio books. Because tag editing and album art is done within iTunes and not QuickTime, these features will not work with these QuickTime components. As of Snow Leopard, iTunes 9 (Mac) will play HE-AAC / AAC+ internet streams. The latest version of iTunes (Win/Mac) supports importing audio CDs using any of the standard audio file formats iTunes supports (AIFF, WAV, Apple Lossless, AAC, MP3), with the AAC and MP3 available in constant bit rate (CBR) or
  
   variable bitrate
  
  (VBR) encoding.
 
  The Windows version of iTunes can automatically transcode DRM-free
  
   WMA
  
  (including version 9) files to other audio formats, but does not support playback of WMA files and will not transcode DRM protected WMA files.
  
   Telestream, Inc.
  
  provides free codecs for Mac users of QuickTime to enable playback of unprotected Windows Media files. These codecs are recommended by
  
   Microsoft
  
  .
  

    [31]
   


  In addition to importing CDs into the iTunes library, users can also import digital audio files from other sources, in any format that iTunes supports. This can be accomplished by either right clicking on the file, selecting open with, and then selecting iTunes or dragging the file into the open iTunes window. Alternatively, for Amazon.com MP3 files, the Amazon MP3 Downloader application will automatically import the files into the iTunes library.
  

    [32]
   


  For MP3 files, iTunes writes tags in
  
   ID3v
  
  2.2 using UCS-2 encoding by default, but converting them to ID3v2.3 (UCS-2 encoding) and ID3v2.4 (which uses UTF-8 encoding) is possible via its "Advanced" > "Convert ID3 Tags" toolbar menu. If both ID3v2.x and ID3v1.x tags are in a file, iTunes ignores the ID3v1.x tags.
  

    [33]
   


  Advanced Audio Coding and Apple Lossless files support Unicode metadata, stored in the MPEG-4 Part 14 container as so-called "atoms". iTunes uses the
  
   Gracenote
  
  interactive audio CD database to provide track name listings for audio CDs. The service can be set to activate when a CD is inserted into the computer and an Internet connection is available. Track names for albums imported to iTunes while not connected to the Internet can be obtained during a later connection, by a manual procedure.
  

    [34]
   

  For any album loaded into iTunes for which there is not an existing Gracenote track listing, the user can choose to submit track name data to Gracenote.
  

    [35]
   


  File metadata is displayed in columns, including album, artist, beats per minute, bit rate, composer, date added, date modified, disc number, genre, last played, last skipped, plays, purchase date, size, skips, time, track number, year, and a few fields that may be supplied by users, such as description, kind, and rating. Metadata fields not loaded with the song, or added by a user, remain blank.
  

    [36]
   


  iTunes utilizes a special ID3 tag in order to display an Explicit or Clean tag on songs purchased from the iTunes store. Unlike most other tags, the tag cannot be changed within iTunes. It can be changed or added to
  
   AAC
  
  files in third party software.
 
  The Genius feature, introduced in iTunes 8,
  
   automatically generates
  
  a playlist of songs from the user's library which are similar to the selected song. Genius playlists are created by the ratings system and
  
   collaborative filtering
  
  . An
  
   iTunes Store
  
  account is required because information about the user's library must first be sent
  
   anonymously
  
  to Apple's
  
   database
  
  .
  
   Algorithms
  
  determine which songs to play based on other users' libraries, and Genius becomes more intelligent given a larger
  
   data set
  
  . The resulting Genius playlist can contain 25, 50, 75, or 100 songs and can be refreshed for new results or saved. Once Genius becomes active in iTunes, it can be used on current generations of the iPod Classic, iPod Nano, iPod Touch or the iPhone.
  

    [37]
   

  iTunes 9 added Genius Mixes, where the Genius software finds similar music and automatically puts them into mixes.
  

    [38]
   

  iTunes Genius creates playlists from the user's existing iTunes library based on a single selected song. Genius Mixes create playlists based on the musical genre.
 
  One way of sharing a library is over the network, known as network sharing. A user's iTunes Library can be shared over a local network using the closed, proprietary
  
   Digital Audio Access Protocol
  
  (DAAP), created by Apple for this purpose. DAAP relies on the
  
   Bonjour
  
  network service discovery framework, Apple's implementation of the
  
   Zeroconf
  
  open network standard. Apple has not made the DAAP specification available to the general public, only to third-party licensees such as
  
   Roku
  
  . However, the protocol has been
  
   reverse-engineered
  
  and is now used to stream audio from non-Apple software (mainly on the
  
   Linux
  
  platform).
  

    [39]
   

  DAAP allows shared lists of songs within the same
  
   subnet
  
  to be automatically detected. When a song is shared, iTunes can stream the song but won't save it on the local hard drive, in order to prevent unauthorized copying. Songs in
  
   Protected AAC
  
  format can also be accessed, but authentication is required. A maximum of five users may connect to a single user every 24 hours. The multiple, alternate "View" options normally available to iTunes users including "Cover Flow" are disabled when viewing a shared library over a network.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  In the period before the arrival of inexpensive streaming services, local network streaming was a popular feature among user groups such as college students connecting their own computers on a local network.
 
  Library sharing was introduced with iTunes 4.0, where users could freely access shared music anywhere over the Internet, in addition to one's own subnet, by specifying
  
   IP addresses
  
  of remote shared song libraries. Apple quickly removed this feature with version 4.0.1, claiming that users were violating the
  
   End User License Agreement
  
  .
  

    [40]
   


  With the release of iTunes 7.0, Apple changed their implementation of DAAP. This change prevents any third-party client, such as a computer running Linux, a modified
  
   Xbox
  
  , or any computer without iTunes installed, from connecting to a remote iTunes repository. iTunes will still connect as a client to other iTunes servers and to third-party servers.
  

    [41]
   


  iTunes libraries can also be shared using the “Home Share” option. This option enables users to share both video and audio files through the application. This allows users to also look for items that they don’t already have.
  

    [42]
   

  Like network sharing, it allows users to share over the same network to up to five computers. The media can then be transferred to any type of iPod or iPad. To set up home sharing, the two computers being used must be on the same network as well as set up using the same
  
   Apple ID
  
  .
 
  Another option to share music files is to burn CDs. To do this the user needs to create a playlist with the songs the user wishes to share. If the playlist exceeds roughly twenty songs it is likely they will need to make multiple CDs. By inserting a disk into the disk drive a button on the bottom of the window should give the option to burn a disk. The files are automatically downloaded to the disk and may be uploaded onto another computer or saved as a backup for the user’s computer.
 
  iTunes allows users to choose different ways to categorize their collection, and displays content according to the selection. The default settings show the music collection sorted by album, laying out the artwork in a grid similar to the iPad Music app (iOS 3.1-6.1.3, 8.4). When selected, albums extend downwards, showing their contents, and allowing users to browse the store for missing or related content. The content listings are themed depending on the predominant color of the album artwork. Film and television shows are laid out in the same manner, with their posters or artwork laid out in a grid. Users may alternately arrange their music collection as a list of every song, by genre, or by artist. These show details in a list structure, but the latter two include the album artwork as thumbnails to aid navigation. Items are automatically arranged alphabetically by album name, but users may rearrange this if using the song list option.
 
  iTunes 11 removes the
  
   Cover Flow
  
  option, previously the default viewing method for a user's music collection. It also disables the sidebar by default, focusing on spreading content across the width of the window. The status bar is also disabled by default. Both of these may be reactivated by the user. The sidebar design has been slightly altered, reinstating the colored icons removed in iTunes 10. When the sidebar is not activated, users can move between media libraries using a drop down menu below the control buttons.
 
  In addition to static playlist support, version 3 of iTunes introduced support for
  
   smart playlists
  
  .
  

    [43]
   

  Smart playlists are playlists that can be set to automatically filter the library based on a customized list of selection criteria, much like a
  
   database
  
  query. Multiple criteria can be entered to manage the smart playlist.
  

    [44]
   


  Some automatic smart playlists that are added to the user’s library include Top 25 Most Played, Recently Played, Recently Added, My Top Rated, Music Videos, Classical Music, Purchased, and 90’s Music. While creating Smart Playlists the user has to choose whether they want the playlist to be based on genre, whether or not the songs have album artwork, date added, etc. and if they want it to contain or not contain certain genres or artists. For example, a genre like
  
   country music
  
  , or songs added in a specific month or year, or an individual artist. The user can also limit the amount of songs they want in the playlist or they can leave it as unlimited. The Live Updating option will automatically update their new playlist as their library changes.
  

    [45]
   


  Introduced in iTunes 4.5,
  

    [46]
   

  the "Party Shuffle" playlist was intended as a simple
  
   DJing
  
  aid.
  

    [47]
   

  By default, it selects tracks randomly from other playlists or the library, but users can override the automatic selections by deleting tracks (iTunes will choose new ones to replace them) or by adding their own via
  
   drag-and-drop
  
  or
  
   contextual menu
  
  . This allows a mixture of both pre selected and random tracks in the same meta-playlist. The playlist from which Party Shuffle drew could be changed on the fly by the computer user, but doing so will cause all randomly chosen tracks to disappear and be replaced.
 
  Party Shuffle was renamed iTunes DJ in iTunes 8. When iTunes was updated to 8.1, quite a few features were added to iTunes DJ. The free Apple Remote application for the iPhone and iPod Touch was also updated at this time that added a new iTunes DJ option in the settings screen when the user is connected to a
  
   Wi-Fi
  
  network and a new song request feature is enabled in iTunes DJ on the hosts. Along with the song request feature voting on songs in the queue was added, the more votes a song gets the higher in the queue it will be and the sooner it will be played. Song voting can only be done when song requesting is enabled and in two ways: the first by right clicking on a song in the iTunes DJ queue on the host's computer in iTunes, the second is in the Remote application ether connected with the iTunes DJ option by a guest or by the host in the full playlist section. When song requesting is enabled a customizable welcome message is displayed below the host's shared library name in the button used to connect to iTunes DJ.
  

    [48]
   


  Playlists can be played
  
   randomly
  
  or
  
   sequentially
  
  . The randomness of the shuffle algorithm can be biased for or against playing multiple tracks from the same album or artists in sequence (a feature introduced in iTunes 5.0, and later discontinued in iTunes 8.0). iTunes DJ can also be biased towards selecting tracks with a higher star rating.
 
  With the release of iTunes 11, the iTunes DJ feature was removed in favor of the Up Next feature, which allows users to specify a song from their collection to play next, add it to a queue of songs to be played, or view a list of previously played tracks. However, the Up Next feature does not include features that used to be found in iTunes DJ, such as the ability for guests to request songs, does not provide as much information as the playlist view, and requires juggling multiple windows and floating dialogs to perform similar tasks.
 
  To compensate for the lack of a physical CD, iTunes can print custom-made
  
   jewel case
  
  inserts as well as song lists and album lists. After burning a CD from a playlist, one can select that playlist and bring up a dialog box with several print options. The user can choose to print either a single album cover (for purchased iTunes albums) or a compilation cover (for user-created playlists). iTunes then automatically sets up a template with art on one side and track titles on the other.
  

    [49]
   


  iTunes includes sound processing features, such as
  
   equalization
  
  , "sound enhancement" and
  
   crossfade
  
  . There is also a feature called
  

    Sound Check
   

  , which automatically adjusts the playback volume of all songs in the library to the same level; this is usually called volume leveling or
  
   audio normalization
  
  . Like "sound enhancement" and crossfade, this can be turned on in the Playback section of iTunes' preferences.
 
  On May 9, 2005, video support was introduced to iTunes with the release of iTunes 4.8. Users can drag and drop video clips from the computer into the iTunes Library for cataloging and organization. They can be viewed in a small frame in the main iTunes display, in a separate window, or full screen. Before version 7 provided separate libraries for media types, videos were only distinguished from audio in the Library by a small icon resembling a TV screen and grouped with music in the library, organized by the same musical categories (such as "album" and "composer").
 
  On October 12, 2005, Apple introduced iTunes 6.0, which added support for purchasing and viewing of video content from the iTunes Music Store. The iTunes Music Store initially offered a selection of thousands of Music Videos and five
  
   TV
  
  shows, including most notably the ABC network's
  

    Lost
   

  and
  

    Desperate Housewives
   

  .
  
   Disney Channel
  
  shows (
  

    The Suite Life of Zack & Cody
   

  and
  

    That's So Raven
   

  ) were also offered 24 hours after airing, as well as episode packs from past seasons. Since then, the collection has expanded to include content from numerous television networks. The iTunes Music Store also gives the ability to view Apple's large collection of film trailers.
 
  As of September 5, 2006, the iTunes Store offers over 550 television shows for download. Additionally, a catalog of 75 feature-length films from
  
   Disney
  
  -owned studios was introduced. As of April 11, 2007, over 500 feature-length films are available through iTunes.
  

    [50]
   


  Originally, films and TV shows were only available to U.S. customers, with the only video content available to non-U.S. customers being music videos and Pixar's short films. This feature is being extended to other countries as licensing issues are resolved.
 
  Video content available from the store used to be encoded as 540 kbit/s Protected
  
   MPEG-4
  
  video (
  
   H.264
  
  ) with an approximately 128 kbit/s AAC audio track. Many videos and video podcasts require the latest version of QuickTime, QuickTime 7, which is incompatible with older versions of Mac OS (only v10.3.9 and later are supported). On September 12, 2006, the resolution of video content sold on the iTunes Store was increased from 320×240 (
  
   QVGA
  
  ) to 640×480 (
  
   VGA
  
  ). The higher resolution video content is encoded as 1.5 Mbit/s (minimum) Protected
  
   MPEG-4
  
  video (
  
   H.264
  
  ) with a minimum 128 kbit/s AAC audio track.
 
  iTunes supports MP4, M4V and MOV files.
 
  In September 2006, iTunes started to sell full-length films.
  

    [51]
   

  This entails downloading movies from the iTunes store. The prices for these range from: $9.99, $14.99 if it is a new release, and $19.99 if it is in
  
   High Definition
  
  .
  

    [52]
   

  iTunes also gives the option of renting movies, which began in January 2008.
  

    [51]
   

  The price for
  
   renting
  
  a movie can range from $0.99 if the movie is on sale, $3.99, and $4.99 if the rental is HD. However, iTunes sometimes carries, for a limited time, movies to rent that are available OnDemand, for a price of $6.99 in both SD and HD. Once a rental is downloaded the viewer has thirty days to watch the movie before it expires. Once the viewer begins to watch the movie he/she has twenty-four (in the US) or forty-eight hours to finish the movie before it expires. Movies can be organized in the iTunes library by title,
  
   genre
  
  , or unwatched.
 
  In October 2005, the iTunes Store began to offer the option of downloading
  
   television shows
  
  in some, not all, markets.
  

    [53]
   

  iTunes offers the option of buying individual episodes of TV shows for $1.99 in standard definition or $2.99 in
  
   high definition
  
  . The high definition feature on TV shows was added in July 2008.
  

    [51]
   

  iTunes also offers the ability to buy a season pass for television shows. This allows viewers to buy an entire season that automatically downloads new episodes around twenty-four hours after they air. In the iTunes library, these shows are then categorized by season of the particular show. iTunes also gives the option of ordering shows based on: series,
  
   genre
  
  , or whether or not the episodes are unwatched. In fall of 2010 iTunes offered TV show rental options, but as of August 2011 this option is no longer offered.
  

    [54]
   


  Version 4.9 of iTunes, released on June 28, 2005, added built-in support for podcasts.
  

    [55]
   


  Users can subscribe to any podcast by entering its
  
   RSS
  
  feed
  
   URL
  
  , but also by browsing the
  
   podcast
  
  directory within the iTunes Store. The front page of this displays high-profile podcasts from commercial broadcasters and independent podcasters and allows searching by category or popularity. Once subscribed, the podcast can be set to download manually, or automatically — and as with other audio, content can be listened to directly or synced to a portable hardware device like an
  
   MP3 player
  
  .
 
  The addition of podcasting functionality to such a widespread audio application like iTunes greatly helped podcasting enter the mainstream.
  

    [56]
   

  Within days after iTunes 4.9 was released, podcasters were reporting that the number of downloads of their audio files had tripled, sometimes even quadrupled,
  

    [57]
   

  and iTunes is considered the dominant
  
   podcast client
  
  .
 
  Version 6 of iTunes introduced official support for
  
   video podcasting
  
  , although video and
  
   RSS
  
  support was already unofficially there in version 4.9.
  

    [58]
   


  Users can subscribe to RSS feeds through the iTunes Store or by directly entering the feed
  
   URL
  
  . Video podcasts can contain downloadable video files (in
  
   MOV
  
  ,
  
   MP4
  
  ,
  
   M4V
  
  , or
  
   MPG
  
  format), but also streaming sources and even
  
   IPTV
  
  .
  

    [59]
   


  Downloadable files can be synchronized to a video-capable iPod, or downloadable files and streams can be shown in
  
   Front Row
  
  .
  

    [58]
   


  iTunes offers the ability to create "Smart Playlists" that can be used to control which podcasts are in the playlist, using multiple criteria such as date, number of times listened to, type, etc.
  

    [60]
   

  It is also possible to set up iTunes so that only certain playlists will be synced with the iPod. By using a combination of the two techniques, it is possible to control exactly which music and/or podcasts will be transferred to the iPod. A user may configure a smart playlist to display only podcasts less than two weeks old or removing any podcast that the iPod user has already listened to. This smart playlist is synced with the iPod every time the iPod is plugged into the PC, ensuring that the user does not have to listen to the same show more than once. Once a podcast has been listened to, it will be removed from this list as soon as the iPod is synced with the PC. There are many criteria which can control what goes in a smart playlist, such as "name", "artist", "category", "grouping", "kind", "last played", "play count", "rating", "last skipped", and "playlist" and these can be combined with functions such as "equals", "is greater than", "is less than", "contains", "does not contain", "is true", "is false", "is", "is not", "starts with", "ends with", "is in the range", "is before", and "is after". As a result, it is possible to control exactly which podcasts are transferred to the iPod.
 
  In February 2010, Apple announced the release of the iPad, and along with it a new app for it called
  
   iBooks
  
  . The application performs two functions. The first function is as a direct link to the iTunes book store, called
  
   iBooks Store
  
  , which can be accessed on iOS devices and computers (Mac or PC). The second was as a storage place for downloaded books (whether free or purchased) from the iBooks Store. The format of books from the Apple store (and the only one users could use with iBooks until PDF functionality was added later) is
  
   ePub
  
  .
 
  Additional functions were later added in mid-2010 to include annotations and placeholders/bookmarks in any book. Also PDF documents were able to be added, and were stored under their own tab in a user's iBooks library, with the same functionality. The iBooks app for the other two iOS devices (iPhone and iPod Touch) was released when iOS 4 was distributed shortly before the release of the iPhone 4.
 
  Until the release of OS X 10.9 Mavericks in October 2013, books (though not PDF documents) could only be read using the app on any iOS device and not on a user's Mac or PC. With the release of Mavericks, Apple released a standalone iBooks app for OS X, which moved books from the iTunes library, and allows Mac users to read these books on their Macs. PDF documents can be read using
  
   Preview
  
  or any other PDF reader/editor application the user has on their machine.
 
  On January 19, 2012,
  
   Apple
  
  announced a new part of the Books store with
  
   textbooks
  
  . They also released a new authoring method called
  
   iBooks Author
  
  .
 
  The App section on iTunes keeps track of all of the apps the user has downloaded or purchased. It also organizes their apps by genre and there is another tab that lets the user see all of their apps. It also informs the user when they have updates available for their apps.
 
  Version 4 of iTunes introduced the
  
   iTunes Store
  
  , then named the iTunes Music Store, from which iTunes users can buy and download songs for use on a limited number of computers and an unlimited number of iPods. In previous years, purchased music from the iTunes Store were copy protected with Apple's
  
   FairPlay
  

   digital rights management
  
  (DRM) system which allows protected songs to be played on up to five computers at one time, as well as unlimited devices (iPod, AppleTV, etc.) DRM protected songs cannot be played on computers not authorized to the purchaser's iTunes account. At the 2009
  
   Macworld Conference & Expo
  
  , it was announced that the iTunes Music Store would be DRM-free, with all songs DRM-free by April 2009.
  

    [61]
   


  Apple also announced changes in their price tier. They announced that songs will now cost $0.69, $0.99, or $1.29, but did not elaborate on how they will be priced. Observers expected new hits to be $1.29 while older songs will be the cheaper $0.99 or $0.69 tier.
  

    [62]
   

  However, many record labels have listed whole catalogs by artists with nothing but $1.29 songs, taking advantage of the price option. Due to this, there are very few songs in the iTunes store with a $0.69 price tag.
  

    [63]
   


  In the years since,
  
   films
  
  ,
  
   television programs
  
  ,
  
   music videos
  
  ,
  
   podcasts
  
  , and the
  
   App Store
  
  (for the iPhone, iPod Touch and iPad) have been added to iTunes' extensive store catalog.
 
  On January 6, 2009,
  
   Phil Schiller
  
  announced in his
  
   Macworld
  
  2009 keynote speech that over 6 billion songs had been downloaded since the service launched on April 28, 2003,
  

    [64]
   

  making it the largest
  
   online music store
  
  in the world.
 
  At the previous Macworld Expo 2008, Apple CEO Steve Jobs stated that the service had set a new single day record of 20 million songs on December 25, 2007. He also announced that the iTunes Store will offer over 1,000 movies for rental by the end of February.
  

    [65]
   

  The iTunes movie catalog includes content from
  
   20th Century Fox
  
  ,
  
   Warner Bros.
  
  ,
  
   Walt Disney Pictures
  
  ,
  
   Paramount Pictures
  
  ,
  
   Universal Studios
  
  , and
  
   Sony Pictures Entertainment
  
  . These movies will also be transferable to all 6th generation iPods.
  

    [66]
   


  On February 25, 2010, Apple announced that over 10 billion tracks had been downloaded from the iTunes Store.
  

    [67]
   


  As of Tuesday, November 16, 2010, Beatles fans could download their entire catalog digitally via iTunes.
  

    [68]
   

  Artists whose music remains largely unavailable include
  
   Garth Brooks
  
  ,
  
   Tool
  
  , and
  
   Aaliyah
  
  .
  
   The KLF
  
  , who infamously deleted their back catalogue, had their catalogue unofficially released onto the iTunes store.
  

    [69]
   



    [70]
   


  On May 30, 2007, Apple announced the launch of "iTunes U" via its digital content store, iTunes, which delivers university lectures through a format called iTunesU.
  

    [71]
   



    [72]
   

  The service was created to manage, distribute, and control access to educational audio and video content for students in a college or university. Member institutions have the opportunity to have their own iTunes U site, which facilitates searching for material. The online service is free for uploading or downloading these documents. iTunes U includes lectures, language lessons, lab demonstrations, sports, and campus tours provided by many colleges and universities in the United States, United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, Ireland and New Zealand.
 
  Right around the end of 2009/start of 2011, new members' institutions no longer have the capability to upload content to Apple's servers. Any member institutions before that are grandfathered in.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  iTunes U has collected materials from a variety of locations around the world, including colleges, universities, museums, libraries and other cultural institutions of educational value. There are more than 75,000 files available for download.
  
   The Open University
  
  in the UK set the record for the most downloads as of October 3, 2011, having reached 40 million downloads.
  

    [73]
   


  In late February 2013, iTunes U surpassed one billion downloads from more than 800 institutions.
  

    [74]
   


  While iTunes 10 supported the Cloud, it did not integrate offline and cloud libraries. A list of previously purchased content was accessible via the iTunes store, where users could download content to the device they were using. Automatic downloading of newly purchased content could also be enabled, and
  
   iTunes Match
  
  allowed content purchased outside of the iTunes store to be uploaded to the Cloud. With the release of iTunes 11, the Cloud became fully integrated into iTunes. Content stored in a user's Cloud is displayed in the same way as that stored on their device, and online content does not have to be downloaded to be played. Films and TV shows also resume from where they were left off on the last device to have played them.
 
  When iTunes was released, it came with support for the
  
   Kerbango
  

   Internet radio
  
  tuner service, giving users a selection of some of the more popular online
  
   radio streams
  
  available.
  

    [75]
   

  When Kerbango went out of business in 2001, Apple created its own Internet radio service for use with iTunes 2.0 and later.
  

    [76]
   

  As of February 2008, the iTunes radio service features 1795 "radio stations", mostly in MP3 streaming format. Programming covers many genres of music and talk, including streams from both internet-only sources and traditional radio stations. iTunes also supports the .pls and .m3u stream file formats used by
  
   Winamp
  
  and other media players.
 
  Since the release of iTunes 7, Apple no longer promotes the Internet radio feature, though it remains in the application. Some third parties offer iTunes plugins that add additional radio stations.
 
  In addition, users are able to enter additional stream feeds to listen to in their own music libraries. This is done by selecting the menu item "Advanced" > "Open Audio Stream..." or by the
  
   hotkey
  
  Ctrl-U (PC) or Command-U (Mac).
  

    [60]
   


  At
  
   Apple Worldwide Developers Conference
  
  (WWDC) 2013, Apple announced iTunes Radio, geared to be an obvious competitor to preexisting streaming/radio services such as
  
   Pandora Radio
  
  ,
  
   Spotify
  
  ,
  
   Slacker Radio
  
  , and several others. iTunes Radio is integrated with
  
   iOS
  
  7 and 8 and iTunes 11.1 and 12.
  
   iTunes Match
  
  customers are opted-in to the full service (ad-free) whereas new/free users will have to listen through the ad-supported version. At WWDC 2015, Apple announced
  
   Apple Music
  
  , a streaming service similar to Spotify Premium, which launched on June 30 and coexists with iTunes Radio in iOS 8.4 and iTunes 12.2. iTunes Radio was discontinued on January 28, 2016, for users who were not members of
  
   Apple Music
  
  .
  

    [77]
   


  Beginning with the introduction of the original iPhone, iTunes can activate an iPhone through their
  
   mobile carrier
  
  . The original plan for the iPhone 3G was to have the carrier authenticate it at the point of sale, either through iTunes or through the carrier's own activation interface.
  

    [78]
   

  However, a worldwide crash of iTunes' authentication servers on July 11, 2008, the day that the iPhone 3G was released, caused major issues. In some cases, AT&T and Apple Store employees told iPhone buyers to attempt to activate it at home.
  

    [79]
   

  Also affected were original iPhone users attempting to upgrade to the 2.0 firmware.
  

    [80]
   



    [81]
   


   UK
  
  Apple,
  
   O2
  
  and Carphone Warehouse stores were further impacted, as carrier O2's contract processing servers (known as Gateway) could not handle the number of new contracts and upgrades happening on launch day. Some stores reverted to hand written contracts, while others held stock. With the launch of the
  
   iPhone 3GS
  
  on June 19, 2009, iTunes at home activation was available for people purchasing their iPhone from
  
   AT&T Mobility
  
  and
  
   Apple
  
  . This allowed them to activate their new iPhone 3G/iPhone 3GS at home when they arrived.
  

    [82]
   


  Apple revealed a new feature within iTunes 10 on September 1, 2010, called Ping,
  

    [83]
   

  which was intended to bring a
  
   social music networking
  
  component to users of iTunes. It was not made available to all countries.
  

    [84]
   

  Ping could be connected to user's Twitter accounts.
  

    [85]
   

  Ping connected user accounts of iTunes, allowing iTunes users to share and recommend music to one another.
 
  Ping also allowed users to follow artists in order to see the photos and videos they have posted, their tour date, playlists they have created, and their comments on other artists’ albums. Users could create a profile so their friends could see whom they were following, what they were listening to, and what concerts they were going to. Ping also showed users' top 10 lists of songs and albums among the people they followed. It also provided artist recommendations to follow based on one's library and preference options.
  

    [86]
   


  Apple officially discontinued the service on September 30, 2012, and have replaced it in iTunes with
  
   Facebook
  
  and
  
   Twitter
  
  integration.
  

    [87]
   


  iTunes 2 was the first version of the software to be able to sync with an iPod. iTunes can automatically
  
   synchronize
  
  its music and video library with an iPod or iPhone every time it is connected. New songs and playlists are automatically copied to the iPod, and songs and playlists that have been deleted from the library on the
  
   host
  
  computer are also deleted from the
  
   iPod
  
  . Ratings awarded to songs on the iPod will sync back to the iTunes library and
  
   audiobooks
  
  will also remember the current playback position.
 
  Automatic synchronization can be turned off in favor of manually copying individual songs or complete playlists. iTunes supports copying music to an iPod; however, only music and videos purchased from the iTunes Store can be transferred from the iPod back to iTunes. This functionality was added after third-party software was written which allowed users to copy all content back to their computer. It is also possible to copy from the iPod using ordinary
  
   Unix
  
  command line tools, or by enabling hidden file viewing in
  
   Windows Explorer
  
  , then copying music from the iPod drive to a local disk for backup. Doing this can be confusing because the files are arranged in such a way that their folders and (depending on iPod and iTunes versions) file names are seemingly picked at random as they are put on the iPod. It is worth noting, however, that the files (along with their embedded title and artist information) remain unchanged. It is therefore less confusing to let iTunes reimport, reorganize, and rename all of the files after they are backed up.
 
  When music or video purchased through the iTunes Store is copied from an iPod, it will only play on computers that are authorized with the account that was used to purchase them. Several third party utilities can remove this limitation by stripping iTunes
  
   DRM
  
  from protected files. The legality of using such software in the United States is the subject of active debate.
  

    [88]
   


  When an iPod is connected that does not contain enough free space to sync the entire iTunes music library, a playlist will be created and given a name matching that of the connected iPod. This playlist can then be modified to the user's preference in song selection to fill the available space.
 
  The macOS version of iTunes can also synchronize with a small number of discontinued
  
   digital music players
  
  ,
  

    [89]
   

  while the Windows version supports only the iPod.
  

    [90]
   

  The synchronization is limited, however, in that the iPod is the only digital music player compatible with Apple's proprietary
  
   FairPlay
  
  digital rights management technology, and thus most music purchased through the iTunes Store (before the introduction of iTunes Plus) can only be played on an iPod. The remaining ability to synchronize with a limited number of legacy digital music players is likely a remnant of Apple's history in the music industry: iTunes was released in January 2001, nine months prior to the iPod's unveiling, and slightly more than two years before the introduction of the iTunes Music Store. When iTunes was released, compatibility with other music players was critical. Since iPod has now become the dominant digital music player, Apple no longer considers that compatibility to be a necessity.
 
  In June 2009,
  
   Palm Inc
  
  released the
  
   Palm Pre
  
  , which has the ability to sync with both the Windows and Mac OS X version of iTunes by identifying itself to iTunes as an iPod. The Pre is able to sync only DRM-free music.
  

    [91]
   

  However, on July 14, 2009, Apple released iTunes version 8.2.1, which prevented the Palm Pre from syncing directly with iTunes. Then on July 23, 2009,
  
   Palm Inc
  
  released
  
   WebOS
  
  1.1, re-enabling syncing between iTunes 8.2.1 and the
  
   Palm Pre
  
  .
  

    [92]
   

  But Apple again prevented Palm Pre syncing with the release of iTunes 9.
  

    [93]
   


  A number of unsupported third-party applications have been created to assist synchronization of songs with any music player that can be mounted as an external drive. Though iTunes is the only official method for synchronizing with the iPod, there are other applications available that allow the iPod to sync with other software players.
 
  As of iTunes 7, purchased music can be copied from the iPod onto the computer. The computer must be authorized by that iTunes account. iTunes allows up to 5 computers to be authorized on one account. To de-authorize and register new computers thereafter, all accounts must be deleted, followed by registering the live one. This can be done only once a year.
 
  iTunes does not feature any transfer facility for importing music files between computers directly. This is being addressed in September 2011 by
  
   iCloud
  
  , but only tracks that Apple sell in their iTunes Store are available (in 256 kbit/s AAC format) without uploading them to iCloud first. Any other tracks, that are either not available in the Store or that the user wants in different encoding can be uploaded to the iCloud with 5 GB of free space and the, as yet undisclosed, potential to purchase more storage. Though what audio formats will be accepted for upload has not been confirmed.
 
  iTunes managed content can also be accessed via the
  
   Apple TV
  
  set-top box. Files in the iTunes library can either be synchronized with the Apple TV unit, which results in their being copied to the Apple TV's hard drive (for the first generation Apple TV), or
  
   streamed
  
  to the Apple TV directly from a Macintosh or PC. Apple TV does not require the use of iTunes (as of the 'Take Two' software update) and can now import files from the
  
   iTunes Store
  
  directly over the internet.
  

    [94]
   


  Wifi and
  
   Bluetooth
  
  became possible.
  

    [95]
   


  In macOS, applications can access the iTunes Library directly, allowing access to its playlists and songs. Music files from iTunes can be embedded directly into
  
   Pages
  
  documents and can be used as soundtracks for iDVD, iMovie, and
  
   Keynote
  
  productions. In addition, any song exported from
  
   GarageBand
  
  , Apple's basic music-making application, is automatically added to the user's iTunes music library. iTunes Artwork.saver is a screen saver included in
  
   macOS
  
  that displays album artwork as a screen saver.
 
  On Windows, Adobe Photoshop Elements can connect to iTunes in order to stream its photo library on Apple TV.
 
  iTunes can be scripted, using
  
   AppleScript
  
  for macOS or using the Apple-provided SDK for iTunes on Windows, allowing many other applications to integrate themselves into iTunes. A common use is to manipulate tags, by finding and replacing text, adding text to the beginning or end of a tag, correct capitalization and more.
 
  iTunes also supports visualizer plugins and device plugins, which allow developers to create music-driven visual displays. Free software development kits are available for Mac and Windows can be downloaded from Apple.
  

    [96]
   

  Device plugins allow support for additional music player devices, but the
  
   APIs
  
  are only licensed to authentic
  
   OEMs
  
  who sign a
  
   non-disclosure agreement
  
  .
 

   Apple Inc.
  
  also offers a free iOS application, Remote, that allows the user to remotely control their iTunes library or
  
   Apple TV
  
  over
  
   DACP
  
  .
  

    [97]
   

  This can be downloaded from iTunes itself or directly from one's iOS device. It is only compatible with iOS 7.0 and above.
 
  Though iTunes itself can be installed where the user desires on Windows, ancillary applications such as Bonjour, which are part of the iTunes installation, cannot be placed in a user-desired directory.
  

    [98]
   



   Apple
  
  licensed
  
   G-Force
  
  for use in iTunes in 2001, and again in 2003.
  

    [99]
   

  This included many different WaveShapes, ColorMaps, and FlowFields; however, these configs may not be available in some versions of G-Force, although they can be found by downloading various zip files.
  

    [100]
   

  With iTunes 8.0 and later, which introduced a new visualizer, the option to select the iTunes Classic Visualizer is available in the Visualizer menu, and remains available in later versions of iTunes.
  

    [101]
   


  In June 2010, Apple updated its general privacy policy for the iTunes Store and iOS 4 supported devices, revealing that it could and would collect real-time location-based information on users aged 13 and over.
  

    [102]
   

  The information had been included in various device-specific
  
   EULAs
  
  since 2008, but was not included in Apple's general privacy policy until 2010.
  

    [103]
   


  The revised policy states that Apple has the right to share this information with 3rd parties who provide services to the customer, including advertising and promotion services. Apple also states that "it may be necessary" to provide this [real-time] information in response to "requests from public and governmental authorities within or outside your country of residence or if [Apple] determines that for purposes of national security, law enforcement, or other issues of public importance, disclosure is necessary or appropriate.... Additionally, in the event of a reorganization, merger, or sale we may transfer any and all personal information we collect to the relevant third party."
 
  The revised policy does not make any distinction between warrant-based and warrantless searches, nor provide what criteria would trigger the sharing of personal real-time information with government entities, nor allow an opt-out for the location-based information.
 
  The revised policy prompted the co-chairs of the Bi-Partisan Privacy Caucus of the
  
   United States House of Representatives
  
  to request that Apple respond to nine basic privacy questions out of concern of possible violation of that country's Federal Communications Act. The Caucus stated it was pleased with Apple's prompt written explanations, and stated they would continue to monitor the issue.
  

    [102]
   



    [104]
   


  Some products are not available in all markets. For example, an iTunes subscriber in the Republic of Ireland cannot purchase a TV programme available in the United Kingdom, despite there being no alternative provider in the Irish market. Consequently, demand cannot be satisfied legitimately.
 


    The Telegraph
   

  reported in November 2011 that Apple had been aware of a security flaw since 2008, that would let unauthorized third parties install "updates" to end-user's iTunes' software.
  

    [105]
   

  They reported that a security writer named
  
   Brian Krebs
  
  had informed Apple of the vulnerability in 2008. They reported that the flaw was only closed in November 2011. They reported that
  
   United Kingdom
  
  security software firm
  
   Gamma International
  
  developed a program named
  
   FinFisher
  
  , intended to covertly spy on computer users, which can be clandestinely installed via bogus updates to iTunes' software.
  

    Der Spiegel
   

  reported Gamma International had advertised the capability to clandestinely install FinFisher by exploiting this iTunes vulnerability.
  

    [106]
   


  iTunes has been accused of being bloated as part of its efforts to turn it from a program that plays media to an e-commerce and advertising platform,
  

    [107]
   



    [108]
   

  with former
  
   PC World
  
  editor Ed Bott accusing the company of hypocrisy in its advertising attacks on Windows for similar practices.
  

    [109]
   

  However, other commentators contest that criticism, saying that iTunes isn't bloated, it is just feature-rich.
  

    [110]
   


  The following is for the newest version of iTunes.
 
  Note: Although iTunes will operate with Windows 10, there is an issue if Windows 7 or Windows 8.1 is updated to Windows 10.
  

    [112]
   

  The iPhone/iPad/iPod USB driver is disabled following the update. Often the only solution is to perform a clean install of Windows.
 