

  The
  
   NeXT Computer
  
  (also called the
  
   NeXT Computer System
  
  ) is a
  
   workstation computer
  
  developed, marketed, and sold by
  
   NeXT
  
  Inc. It runs the
  
   Mach
  
  - and
  
   BSD
  
  -derived,
  
   Unix
  
  -based
  
   NeXTSTEP
  
  operating system, with a proprietary GUI using a
  
   Display PostScript
  
  -based back end. The motherboard is square and fits into one of four identical slots in the enclosure. The NeXT Computer enclosure consists of a 1-foot (305 mm)
  
   die-cast
  

   magnesium
  
  cube-shaped, black case, which led to the machine being informally referred to as "The Cube". It was launched in 1988 at
  

    US$
   
   6,500
  
  (equivalent to $13,200 in 2016).
 
  The NeXT Computer was succeeded by the
  
   NeXTcube
  
  , an upgraded model, in 1990.
 


  The NeXT Computer was revealed at a lavish, invitation only, gala launch event in October 1988 "
  
   NeXT Introduction
  
  – the Introduction to the NeXT Generation of Computers for Education" at the
  
   War Memorial Opera House
  
  ,
  
   San Francisco
  
  , California. The following day, selected educators and software developers were invited (for $100 registration fee) to attend the first public technical overview of the NeXT computer at an event called "The NeXT Day" held at the San Francisco Hilton. This event gave developers interested in developing NeXT software an insight into the software architecture,
  
   object-oriented programming
  
  , and developing for the NeXT Computer. The luncheon speaker was
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  .
 


    BYTE
   

  in 1989 listed the NeXT Computer as among the "Excellence" winners of the BYTE Awards, stating that it "shows what can be done when a personal computer is designed as a system, and not a collection of hardware elements". Citing as "truly innovative" the optical drive, DSP, and object-oriented programming environment, the magazine concluded that "the NeXT Computer is worth every penny of its $6500 market price".
  

    [1]
   

  It was, however, not a significant commercial success, failing to reach the level of high volume sales like the
  
   Apple II
  
  ,
  
   Commodore 64
  
  , the
  
   Macintosh
  
  , or
  
   Microsoft Windows
  
  PCs. The workstations were sold to universities, financial institutions, and government agencies.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  A NeXT Computer and its
  
   object oriented
  
  development tools and libraries were used by
  
   Tim Berners-Lee
  
  and
  
   Robert Cailliau
  
  at
  
   CERN
  
  to develop the world's first
  
   web server
  
  software,
  
   CERN httpd
  
  , and also used to write the first
  
   web browser
  
  ,
  
   WorldWideWeb
  
  .
 
  The NeXT Computer and the same
  
   object oriented
  
  development tools and libraries were used by Jesse Tayler at Paget Press to develop the first electronic
  
   AppStore
  
  The
  
   Electronic AppWrapper
  
  in the early 1990s. Issue #3 was first demonstrated to
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  at NeXTWorld Expo 1993.
 
  A fun fact and one of Steve Jobs' quirks. All the components in the cube including the PCB and connectors had to be black in color. PCBs were typically green from the solder mask that was applied. A process of "pad capping" was developed to allow the black oxide from the inner layers to be seen and a then clear solder mask was applied to the outer layers. Even the euro card connector (DIN91612)had to be specially molded in black which where typically grey. The mounting hardware had to be black oxide. etc..
 