


   Front Row
  
  was a
  
   media center
  
  software application for
  
   Apple
  
  's
  
   Macintosh
  
  computers and
  
   Apple TV
  
  for navigating and viewing video, photos, podcasts, and music from a computer, optical disc, or the Internet through a
  
   10-foot user interface
  
  (similar to
  
   Windows Media Center
  
  and
  
   Kodi
  
  ). The software relies on iTunes and iPhoto and is controlled by an
  
   Apple Remote
  
  or the keyboard function keys. The first version was released October 2005, with two major revisions since. Front Row was removed and discontinued in
  
   Mac OS X 10.7
  
  .
  

    [1]
   




  Front Row was first unveiled on October 12, 2005 with the new
  
   iMac G5
  
  (along with the built-in iSight camera, the
  
   Apple Remote
  
  , and
  
   Photo Booth
  
  ).
  

    [2]
   

  The software was billed as an alternative interface for playing and running
  
   iPhoto
  
  ,
  
   DVD Player
  
  , and
  
   iTunes
  
  (
  
   Internet radio
  
  stations could play by adding the station into a playlist in iTunes).
 
  The next incarnation, released in the original
  
   Apple TV
  
  software in March 2007, was a complete, stand alone application that played content directly from libraries. Among the features added were more prominent
  
   podcasts
  
  and TV show menus, trailer streaming, a settings menu, streaming content from computers on the local network, and album and video art for local media. In the summer of 2007, Apple released an update adding streaming of
  
   YouTube
  
  videos.
 
  Released in November 2007 with
  
   Mac OS X v10.5 (Leopard)
  
  ,
  

    [3]
   

  version two of Front Row included the new features introduced with the Apple TV (except for the YouTube viewer), a different opening transition, ending
  
   AirTunes
  
  functionality, and a launcher application in addition to the Command+Escape
  
   keyboard shortcut
  
  .
 
  Front Row 2 has an undocumented
  
   plug-in
  
  architecture, for which various third-party plugins are now available, based on reverse-engineering the Front Row environment. Because it uses
  
   QuickTime
  
  to render video, Front Row can utilize any codec installed in QuickTime, including
  
   DivX
  
  ,
  
   Xvid
  
  , and
  
   WMV
  
  , and play DVD images copied to the hard disk. However, because Front Row does not use
  
   QuickTime X
  
  , it lacks support for certain codec features like Sample Aspect Ratio.
 
  In February 2008, Apple announced a Front Row update branded "Apple TV Take Two." In addition to the prominent addition of direct downloads for movies, TV episodes, and podcasts via the
  
   iTunes Store
  
  , movie rentals, the ability for viewing online photos from
  
   Flickr
  
  or
  
   MobileMe
  
  (branded
  
   .Mac
  
  at the time), and the streaming of audio to AirTunes were added.
 
  Front Row was discontinued with the July 2011 release of
  
   Mac OS X Lion
  
  (v 10.7). The software appeared in neither the early Developer Previews nor the final version.
 
  While it was initially possible to reinstall Front Row by copying the frameworks and application into OS X Lion,
  

    [4]
   


   iTunes
  
  v 10.4 on 22 July 2011 broke compatibility, causing those who updated iTunes to lose access to their music through Front Row.
  

    [5]
   

