


   OS X Mountain Lion
  
  (version 10.8) is the ninth
  
   major release
  
  of
  
   OS X (now named macOS)
  
  ,
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  's desktop and
  
   server
  
  operating system for
  
   Macintosh
  
  computers. OS X Mountain Lion was released on July 25, 2012 for purchase and download through Apple's
  
   Mac App Store
  
  , as part of a switch to releasing OS X versions online and every year. Named to signify its status as a refinement of the previous
  
   Mac OS X
  
  version,
  
   Lion
  
  , Apple's stated aims in developing Mountain Lion were to allow users to more easily manage and synchronise content between multiple Apple devices and to make the operating system more familiar. Mountain Lion is also the final version of OS X to be developed under the supervision of then-OS X head
  
   Scott Forstall
  
  .
 
  The operating system gained the new malware-blocking system
  
   Gatekeeper
  
  and integration with Apple's online
  
   Game Center
  
  and
  
   iCloud
  
  services, while the
  
   Safari
  
  web browser was updated to
  
   version 6
  
  . As on iOS,
  
   Notes
  
  and
  
   Reminders
  
  became full applications, separate from
  
   Mail
  
  and
  
   Calendar
  
  , while the
  
   iChat
  
  application was replaced with a version of iOS's
  
   Messages
  
  . Mountain Lion also added a version of iOS's
  
   Notification Center
  
  , which groups updates from different applications in one place. Integrated links allowing the user to rapidly transfer content to
  
   Twitter
  
  were present in the operating system from launch.
  
   Facebook
  
  integration was also planned but unfinished at launch date. It was released as a downloadable update later.
 
  OS X Mountain Lion received positive reviews, with critics praising Notification Center, Messages, and speed improvements over
  
   Mac OS X Lion
  
  , while criticizing iCloud for unreliability and Game Center for lack of games. Mountain Lion sold three million units in the first four days, and has sold 28 million units as of June 10, 2013, making it Apple's most popular
  
   OS X
  
  release.
 


  OS X Mountain Lion was officially announced by Apple on their website on February 16, 2012, as a successor to
  
   Mac OS X 10.7 Lion
  
  .
  

    [3]
   

  It achieved
  
   golden master
  
  status on July 9, 2012.
  

    [4]
   

  Following a soft transition started with Mac OS X Lion, Apple consistently refers to OS X Mountain Lion as "OS X" rather than "Mac OS X".
  

    [3]
   



    [5]
   


  During the
  
   Apple Worldwide Developers Conference
  
  keynote on June 11, 2012, Apple announced a "near final" release version of Mountain Lion for developers, with the public version arriving in July 2012 at a price tag of US$19.99
  

    [6]
   

  (€15.99 in Europe, £13.99 in the UK, $20.99 in Australia and ￥128 in Mainland China). The
  
   third generation MacBook Pro
  
  , revised
  
   MacBook Air
  
  , iPad Smart Case, and third-generation
  
   AirPort Express
  
  were announced at the keynote as well.
  

    [7]
   


  The specific release date of July 25 was not confirmed until the day before, July 24, by Apple CEO,
  
   Tim Cook
  
  , as part of Apple's 2012 third-quarter earnings announcement.
  

    [8]
   

  It was released to the Mac App Store on July 25, 2012, where it sold 3 million units in the first four days of release.
  

    [9]
   



    [10]
   


  An update for Mountain Lion, version 10.8.1, was released on August 23, 2012. It resolved issues with iMessages,
  
   Migration Assistant
  
  , Safari,
  
   Microsoft Exchange Server
  
  , Mail, and many other applications.
  

    [11]
   

  Tests of the update revealed that 10.8.1 also improved battery life on laptops, albeit gaining back only half of the battery life that was lost in updating to Mountain Lion.
  

    [12]
   

  Although 10.8.1 improved battery life for some customers, others continue to complain about reduced battery life and a constant drop in battery health, ultimately resulting in a "Service Battery" message.
  

    [13]
   


  The official system requirements of OS X 10.8 are 2 GB RAM, 8 GB available storage,
  
   OS X 10.6.8 (Snow Leopard)
  
  or later, on any of the following Macs:
  

    [14]
   


  As in 10.7, the earliest models supporting AirDrop are the late-2008 MacBook Pro, late-2010 MacBook Air, late-2008 MacBook, mid-2010 Mac Mini, and early-2009 Mac Pro with an AirPort Extreme card. Any Mac released in or after 2011, except the
  
   MacBook
  
  , supports AirPlay Mirroring. Power Nap is supported on the mid-2011 or newer MacBook Air and the
  
   MacBook Pro with Retina display
  
  .
  

    [15]
   


  The technical basis for these requirements is incompatibility with 32-bit
  
   EFI
  
  and 32-bit kernel extensions (most importantly, drivers for
  
   GPUs
  
  shipped in some older Macs). In order to prevent potentially incompatible systems from installing 10.8, the installer contains a
  
   whitelist
  
  of supported motherboard IDs. Users have bypassed these limitations so that 10.8 may run with varying functionality on some officially unsupported computers.
  

    [16]
   



   Notification Center
  
  was added in the operating system. It provides an overview of alerts from applications and displays notifications until the user completes an associated action, rather than requiring instant resolution. Users may choose what applications appear in Notification Center, and how they are handled.
  

    [17]
   

  There are three types of notifications: banners, alerts, and badges. Banners are displayed for a short period of time in the upper right corner of the Mac's screen, and then slide off to the right. The icon of the application is displayed on the left side of the banner, while the message from the application will be displayed on the right side. Alerts are the same as banners, but will not disappear from the screen until the user takes action. Badges are red notification icons that are displayed on the application's icon. They indicate the number of items available for the application.
  

    [18]
   


  Notification Center can be accessed by clicking the icon in the right corner of the menu bar. When open, the user can click a button to
  
   tweet
  
  , post status updates to
  
   Facebook
  
  , or view all notifications in the sidebar pane. Swiping up will reveal the option to disable Notification Center for one day.
  

    [19]
   

  Many settings of Notification Center can be customized under the "Notifications" pane in
  
   System Preferences
  
  . Each application can have three ways to display notifications: none, banners, and alerts. Options to toggle the app icons and sounds are also available. Users can click and drag an app in the pane to change the order the applications are displayed within Notification Center.
  

    [20]
   


  Notes, another transfer from
  
   iOS
  
  , is added. It is separate from
  
   Mail
  
  in its own application, with support for desktop notes added (syncs along with its
  
   iOS
  
  counterpart).
  

    [21]
   



    [22]
   

  Created notes are synced through all the user's Apple devices through the iCloud service.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  Notes can be arranged in folders, and pinned to the user's desktop. When the application is closed, the pinned note still remains.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  Notes can be created in three different default fonts - Noteworthy, Marker Felt, and Helvetica. Users can add custom fonts by visiting the
  
   Show Fonts
  
  menu. The menu allows users to change text size, format lists, choose the alignment (left, center, justify, or right), assign a writing direction, and indent text. Attachments, images, and
  
   hyperlinks
  
  can also be added into a note. Attachments cannot be viewed on iOS devices.
  

    [23]
   


  Messages, an
  
   instant messaging
  

   software application
  
  , is added in Mountain Lion. It was announced on February 16, 2012, as part of the OS X Mountain Lion developer preview.
  

    [24]
   

  Starting with this release, Messages replaced
  
   iChat
  
  as the default OS X instant-messaging client. A free beta version of Messages was available to download for Mac OS X Lion from the Apple website until June 2012.
  

    [25]
   

  The final version of Messages was included with the release version of OS X Mountain Lion.
  

    [26]
   


  As with its predecessor, Messages has text messaging, audio, and screen-sharing capabilities. Messages also contains native video conversation support, utilising Apple's
  
   FaceTime
  
  video calling application where possible. However, it does retain video capabilities for interfacing with other instant messaging clients.
  

    [27]
   



    [28]
   

  Messages supports Apple's
  
   iMessage
  
  , a free instant messaging service previously only available on devices running
  
   iOS 5
  
  . It also supports both
  
   Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol
  
  (XMPP) (shown in the application under its former name, Jabber) and the
  
   AOL Instant Messenger
  
  (AIM)
  
   OSCAR protocol
  
  . In addition, it also offers a direct connection to
  
   Yahoo! Messenger
  
  and
  
   Google Talk
  
  .
  

    [25]
   


  The
  
   Game Center
  
  application from iOS was added in OS X Mountain Lion. It is an
  
   online
  

   multiplayer
  
  social-gaming network, and allows users to invite friends to play a game, start a multiplayer game through matchmaking, track their achievements, and compare their high scores on a leader board.
  

    [29]
   

  Points are awarded to players as a part of Game Center's
  
   achievement
  
  tracking system. Players can earn points by meeting specific in-game challenges.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  A player must establish an
  
   Apple ID
  
  to associate with a Game Center nickname.
  

    [30]
   

  A player has the option to create an Apple ID from within Game Center if he or she does not already have one. Only one nickname may be associated with an Apple ID at any given time.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  Each player is assigned a profile in Game Center. A profile consists of the player's nickname, the number of Game Center-compatible games the player owns, the number of friends the player has, the number of achievement points a player has, and an optional photo and player-defined status.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  OS X Mountain Lion added updates for many applications on the operating system. The
  
   Chess
  
  app supports
  
   Game Center
  
  .
  
   Dashboard
  
  widgets can be managed in a UI similar to Launchpad.
  

    [31]
   


   Mail
  
  adds new VIP feature to save frequent contacts.
  

    [32]
   

  The
  
   Preview
  
  app gets an improved user interface.
  

    [33]
   

  It is able to fill out forms in PDF documents that don't contain actual PDF form fields.
  
   Reminders
  
  is a new to-do list application, separate from
  
   Calendar
  
  in its own application that syncs along with its
  
   iOS
  
  counterpart.
  

    [34]
   


   Safari 6
  
  gets a new release and features a new address bar; a combination of the address bar and the search field. The address bar also has a "Reader" button, showing the user just the text of the article without advertisements and distraction. When the user is on a website with no article, the button is disabled.
  

    [35]
   

  Safari 6 is available as a download for
  
   Mac OS X Lion
  
  .
  
   Time Machine
  
  is able to do rotating backups on more than one storage medium.
  

    [36]
   


  AirPlay Mirroring is added, which allows wireless mirroring of a Mac's screen to an
  
   Apple TV
  
  .
  

    [37]
   

  System-wide integration of AirPlay audio transmission is added.
  

    [38]
   

  There are many new features for Chinese users, including support for
  
   Baidu
  
  as an option for
  
   Safari
  
  search engine,
  
   QQ
  
  ,
  
   163.com
  
  and 126.com services for
  
   Mail
  
  ,
  
   Contacts
  
  and
  
   Calendar
  
  ,
  
   Youku
  
  ,
  
   Tudou
  
  and
  
   Sina Weibo
  
  are integrated into share sheets.
  

    [39]
   

  Dictation, new in Mountain Lion, is a system-wide voice input mechanism that requires a broadband Internet connection.
  

    [40]
   



    [41]
   


   Facebook
  
  gained full integration following an update in late 2012. Some of the features include single-sign on and integration in Notification Center, Contacts and Share Sheets.
  

    [42]
   


   Gatekeeper
  
  , also new to Mountain Lion, is an
  
   anti-malware
  
  feature based on
  
   digital signatures
  
  and the
  
   Mac App Store
  
  .
  

    [43]
   


  Power Nap allows flash storage-based Macintoshes (late 2010 MacBook Air and later, or the MacBook Pro with Retina display) to synchronize with iCloud (Reminders, Calendars, Photo Stream, Notes, Mail, and Find My Mac) while sleeping and also allows a Mac to download App Store and OS X updates as well as make periodic Time Machine backups when it is plugged in and sleeping. Several new screensavers were added.
  

    [44]
   

  Share Sheets, a "Share" button and dialog box in
  
   Safari
  
  and other applications, are added.
  

    [45]
   


   Twitter
  
  was integrated with almost all of the applications, with single-sign on, tweeting from an app, Tweet Sheets, tweeting photos and links, using multiple Twitter accounts, Twitter notifications, profile picture integration, and Location Services available.
  

    [46]
   


  Application updates automatically install from the
  
   Mac App Store
  
  . The
  
   iCloud
  
  library
  
   User interface
  
  (UI) was integrated throughout the operating systems, which includes new Open and Save dialog boxes across built-in applications,
  
   iWork
  
  and third-party applications via an
  
   Application programming interface
  
  (API). Applications that make use of this API support a new user interface to view and manage documents in the cloud that are specific to the application being used.
  

    [47]
   

  Documents can be renamed from the title bar. iWork documents automatically synchronize with iCloud. The full screen ability is on every display.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  The
  
   Dock
  
  has received an updated look, emulating the appearance of the aluminum metal surface that much of Apple's current hardware line-up sports.
  

    [48]
   

  Scroll bars widen when the mouse hovers over them. Finder displays a progress bar in the "size" column when copying a file, and on icons in Launchpad when downloading from the Mac App Store.
  
   Launchpad
  
  has
  
   Spotlight
  
  search for finding applications.
  

    [49]
   

  Address Book was renamed "
  
   Contacts
  
  ",
  

    [47]
   

  and iCal was renamed "
  
   Calendar
  
  ".
  

    [47]
   


  Reception for OS X Mountain Lion has generally been positive. John Siracusa of
  
   Ars Technica
  
  said that 10.8 corrected and simplified UI changes made with Lion, saying that it had become "what 10.7 should've been" and that the faster speeds and features merit the upgrade, then adding that "If we'd had to wait for two years after 10.6 for the next major release of OS X, chances are good that the worst of the missteps in Lion would just be landing on our doorsteps today. I'll take 10.8, thanks."
  

    [52]
   

  Many reviewers found that Mountain Lion was far more stable than its predecessor, including
  
   Jason Snell
  
  of
  

    Macworld
   

  , who said "All told, I found Mountain Lion to be a stable, solid release. Even prerelease builds were far more stable than I've come to expect from OS X betas, leading me to wonder if Apple's new annual schedule is leading to more careful incremental updates (with fewer bugs) rather than great leaps (with more, nastier bugs)."
  

    [57]
   


  The general attitude towards Mountain Lion was that it was faster and smoother, including Brian Heater of
  
   Engadget
  
  , who said the following:
  

    [58]
   


   "Taken as a whole, the features mark a fairly aggressive bid to fold the best of OS X and iOS into one product -- a strategy we first saw with the introduction of the Mac App Store on Snow Leopard, and with the arrival of Launchpad last year in Lion. [...]
  
   That said, it seems time for Apple to make a bold new pronouncement on the desktop front. The company appears to have most of its resources invested in the mobile side -- and there's no question as to why: the iPhone and iPad have reinvigorated the company, making it a computing player on a scale that no one (save, perhaps, for Jobs himself) could have predicted a decade ago. Still, it might be hard for OS X users not to feel neglected -- many of the latest new features feel a bit like iOS hand-me-downs. When and if Apple rolls out a new operating system this time next year, hopefully we'll be seeing a very different side of Mac OS."
   

     [58]
    


  MG Siegler of
  
   TechCrunch
  
  said that the difference between Lion and Mountain Lion was not comparable to the difference between Leopard and Snow Leopard because Mountain Lion adds many new features that were not available in Lion. He also praised the application compatibility and said that the only updates needed were to add Notification Center features to applications.
  

    [59]
   

  Jim Dalrymple of The Loop commented "there will be tens of thousands of words published on Wednesday when Mountain Lion hits the Mac App Store, but let's face it, what you really want to know is whether Mountain Lion is worth the upgrade. Let's get that out of the way now — yes, it is definitely worth it," and said that at $19.99, Mountain Lion was a "bargain".
  

    [60]
   


   David Pogue
  
  of
  

    The New York Times
   

  said "Over all, then, Mountain Lion is a gentle, thoughtful upgrade. All 200 new features? No, not really. But 10 that you'll use every day? For $20? Yes."
  

    [61]
   


  While the operating system in general was well received, some reviewers dissented from that viewpoint. Jesus Diaz of
  
   Gizmodo
  
  felt that Apple was running out of ideas and that Microsoft's
  
   Windows 8
  
  may out-innovate OS X.
  

    [62]
   

  Apple also received criticism for failing to provide an official upgrade pathway for owners of 2006
  
   Mac Pro
  

   workstation
  
  computers.
  

    [63]
   


  Game Center was the most criticised aspect of Mountain Lion. Reviewers criticized the service for the lack of games available, reliability issues and the lack of integration with iOS games. Scott Stein of
  
   CNET
  
  commented "Game Center-compatible titles will have achievements, leaderboard info...and, potentially, a way of playing cross-platform games. As of the time of this post, I could find only seven Game Center games featured the Mac App Store," and "Until Game Center becomes a complete portal for all games on the Mac, and a true method of cross-platform iOS/Mac play, I'm not sure many people will even bother checking it out."
  

    [64]
   

  Matt Clark of
  
   MacLife
  
  also commented that if developers don't develop applications for Game Center, it is "likely doomed to sit unnoticed on your hard drive".
  

    [65]
   


  Mountain Lion sold 3 million units in the first four days, making it Apple's most successful OS X release to date.
  

    [10]
   

  A report by
  
   Chitika Insights
  
  revealed that OS X Mountain Lion had been used by 3.2% of OS X users within the first 48 hours of release, and 10% penetration in the first month.
  

    [66]
   



      OS X v10.8.2 Combo update
     

     (supplementary update described at the end)
    

      OS X v10.8.3 Combo update
     


      OS X v10.8.4 Combo update
     


      OS X v10.8.5 Combo update
     

  Note: Combo updates include all previous releases (ex: 10.8 to 10.8.3). Individual update is a smaller package size and can be used if currently using the previous release (ex: 10.8.2 to 10.8.3).
 