

  A
  
   web browser
  
  (commonly referred to as a
  
   browser
  
  ) is a
  
   software application
  
  for retrieving, presenting and traversing information resources on the
  
   World Wide Web
  
  . An
  
   information resource
  
  is identified by a
  
   Uniform Resource Identifier
  
  (URI/URL) that may be a
  
   web page
  
  , image, video or other piece of content.
  

    [1]
   


   Hyperlinks
  
  present in resources enable users easily to navigate their
  
   browsers
  
  to related resources.
 
  Although browsers are primarily intended to use the World Wide Web, they can also be used to access information provided by
  
   web servers
  
  in
  
   private networks
  
  or files in
  
   file systems
  
  .
 
  The most popular web browsers are
  
   Google Chrome
  
  ,
  
   Microsoft Edge
  
  (preceded by
  
   Internet Explorer
  
  ),
  

    [2]
   



    [3]
   



    [4]
   


   Safari
  
  ,
  
   Opera
  
  and
  
   Firefox
  
  .
 


  The first web browser was invented in 1990 by Sir
  
   Tim Berners-Lee
  
  . Berners-Lee is the director of the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), which oversees the Web's continued development, and is also the founder of the World Wide Web Foundation. His browser was called
  
   WorldWideWeb
  
  and later renamed Nexus.
  

    [5]
   


  The first commonly available web browser with a graphical user interface was
  
   Erwise
  
  . The development of Erwise was initiated by
  
   Robert Cailliau
  
  .
 
  In 1993, browser software was further innovated by
  
   Marc Andreessen
  
  with the release of
  
   Mosaic
  
  , "the world's first popular browser",
  

    [6]
   

  which made the World Wide Web system easy to use and more accessible to the average person. Andreesen's browser sparked the internet boom of the 1990s.
  

    [6]
   

  The introduction of Mosaic in 1993 – one of the first graphical web browsers – led to an explosion in web use. Andreessen, the leader of the Mosaic team at
  
   National Center for Supercomputing Applications
  
  (NCSA), soon started his own company, named
  
   Netscape
  
  , and released the Mosaic-influenced
  
   Netscape Navigator
  
  in 1994, which quickly became the world's most popular browser, accounting for 90% of all web use at its peak (see
  
   usage share of web browsers
  
  ).
 

   Microsoft
  
  responded with its
  
   Internet Explorer
  
  in 1995, also heavily influenced by Mosaic, initiating the industry's first
  
   browser war
  
  . Bundled with
  
   Windows
  
  , Internet Explorer gained dominance in the web browser market; Internet Explorer usage share peaked at over 95% by 2002.
  

    [7]
   



   Opera
  
  debuted in 1996; it has never achieved widespread use, having less than 2% browser usage share as of February 2012 according to Net Applications.
  

    [9]
   

  Its Opera-mini version has an additive share, in April 2011 amounting to 1.1% of overall browser use, but focused on the fast-growing mobile phone web browser market, being preinstalled on over 40 million phones. It is also available on several other
  
   embedded systems
  
  , including
  
   Nintendo
  
  's
  
   Wii
  
  video game console.
 
  In 1998, Netscape launched what was to become the
  
   Mozilla Foundation
  
  in an attempt to produce a competitive browser using the
  
   open source
  
  software model. That browser would eventually evolve into
  
   Firefox
  
  , which developed a respectable following while still in the
  
   beta
  
  stage of development; shortly after the release of Firefox 1.0 in late 2004, Firefox (all versions) accounted for 7% of browser use.
  

    [7]
   

  As of August 2011, Firefox has a 28% usage share.
  

    [9]
   



   Apple
  
  's
  
   Safari
  
  had its first beta release in January 2003; as of April 2011, it had a dominant share of Apple-based web browsing, accounting for just over 7% of the entire browser market.
  

    [9]
   


  The most recent major entrant to the browser market is
  
   Chrome
  
  , first released in September 2008. Chrome's take-up has increased significantly year by year, by doubling its usage share from 8% to 16% by August 2011. This increase seems largely to be at the expense of Internet Explorer, whose share has tended to decrease from month to month.
  

    [10]
   

  In December 2011, Chrome overtook
  
   Internet Explorer 8
  
  as the most widely used web browser but still had lower usage than all versions of Internet Explorer combined.
  

    [11]
   

  Chrome's user-base continued to grow and in May 2012, Chrome's usage passed the usage of all versions of Internet Explorer combined.
  

    [12]
   

  By April 2014, Chrome's usage had hit 45%.
  

    [13]
   


  Internet Explorer was deprecated in
  
   Windows 10
  
  , with
  
   Microsoft Edge
  
  replacing it as the default web browser.
  

    [14]
   


  The ways that web browser makers fund their development costs has changed over time. The first web browser, WorldWideWeb, was a research project.
 
  In addition to being
  
   freeware
  
  , Netscape Navigator and Opera were also sold commercially.
 
  Internet Explorer, on the other hand, was bundled free with the Windows operating system (and was also downloadable free), and therefore it was funded partly by the sales of Windows to computer manufacturers and direct to users. Internet Explorer also used to be available for the Mac. It is likely that releasing IE for the Mac was part of Microsoft's overall strategy to fight threats to its quasi-monopoly platform dominance – threats such as web standards and Java – by making some web developers, or at least their managers, assume that there was "no need" to develop for anything other than Internet Explorer. In this respect, IE may have contributed to Windows and Microsoft applications sales in another way, through "
  
   lock-in
  
  " to Microsoft's browser.
 
  In January 2009, the European Commission announced it would investigate the bundling of Internet Explorer with Windows operating systems from Microsoft, saying "Microsoft's tying of Internet Explorer to the Windows operating system harms competition between web browsers, undermines product innovation and ultimately reduces consumer choice."
  

    Microsoft Corp v Commission
   



    [15]
   



    [16]
   


  Safari and Mobile Safari were likewise always included with OS X and iOS respectively, so, similarly, they were originally funded by sales of Apple computers and mobile devices, and formed part of the overall Apple experience to customers.
 
  Some commercial web browsers are paid by search engine companies to make their engine default, or to include them as another option. For example,
  
   Yahoo!
  
  pays
  
   Mozilla
  
  , the maker of Firefox, to make
  
   Yahoo! Search
  
  the default search engine in Firefox. Mozilla makes enough money from this deal that it does not need to charge users for Firefox. By virtue of common ownership,
  
   Microsoft Edge
  
  , Internet Explorer, and Google Chrome default to their respective vendors' own search engines,
  
   Bing
  
  and
  
   Google Search
  
  , and may integrate with other platforms offered by the vendor. This encourages the use of their first-party services, which in turn, exposes users to advertising that can be used as a source of revenue.
 
  Many less-well-known
  
   free software
  
  browsers, such as
  
   Konqueror
  
  , were hardly funded at all and were developed mostly by volunteers free of charge.
 
  The primary purpose of a web browser is to bring information resources to the user ("retrieval" or "fetching"), allowing them to view the information ("display", "rendering"), and then access other information ("navigation", "following links").
 
  This process begins when the user inputs a
  
   Uniform Resource Locator
  
  (URL), for example
  
   http://en.wikipedia.org/
  
  , into the browser. The prefix of the URL, the Uniform Resource Identifier or
  
   URI
  
  , determines how the URL will be interpreted. The most commonly used kind of URI starts with
  
   http:
  
  and identifies a resource to be retrieved over the
  
   Hypertext Transfer Protocol
  
  (HTTP).
  

    [17]
   

  Many browsers also support a variety of other prefixes, such as
  
   https:
  
  for
  
   HTTPS
  
  ,
  
   ftp:
  
  for the
  
   File Transfer Protocol
  
  , and
  
   file:
  
  for
  
   local files
  
  . Prefixes that the web browser cannot directly handle are often handed off to another application entirely. For example,
  
   mailto:
  
  URIs are usually passed to the user's default e-mail application, and
  
   news:
  
  URIs are passed to the user's default newsgroup reader.
 
  In the case of
  
   http
  
  ,
  
   https
  
  ,
  
   file
  
  , and others, once the resource has been retrieved the web browser will display it.
  
   HTML
  
  and associated content (image files, formatting information such as
  
   CSS
  
  , etc.) is passed to the browser's
  
   layout engine
  
  to be transformed from
  
   markup
  
  to an interactive document, a process known as "rendering". Aside from HTML, web browsers can generally display any kind of content that can be part of a web page. Most browsers can display images, audio, video, and
  
   XML
  
  files, and often have
  
   plug-ins
  
  to support
  
   Flash
  
  applications and
  
   Java applets
  
  . Upon encountering a file of an unsupported type or a file that is set up to be downloaded rather than displayed, the browser prompts the user to save the file to disk.
 
  Information resources may contain
  
   hyperlinks
  
  to other information resources. Each link contains the URI of a resource to go to. When a link is clicked, the browser navigates to the resource indicated by the link's target URI, and the process of bringing content to the user begins again.
 
  Available web browsers range in features from minimal, text-based user interfaces with bare-bones support for HTML to rich user interfaces supporting a wide variety of file formats and protocols. Browsers which include additional components to support e-mail,
  
   Usenet
  
  news, and
  
   Internet Relay Chat
  
  (IRC), are sometimes referred to as "
  
   Internet suites
  
  " rather than merely "web browsers".
  

    [19]
   



    [20]
   



    [21]
   


  All major web browsers allow the user to open multiple information resources at the same time, either in different browser windows or in different
  
   tabs
  
  of the same window. Major browsers also include
  
   pop-up blockers
  
  to prevent unwanted windows from "popping up" without the user's consent.
  

    [22]
   



    [23]
   



    [24]
   



    [25]
   


  Most web browsers can display a list of web pages that the user has
  

    bookmarked
   

  so that the user can quickly return to them. Bookmarks are also called "Favorites" in
  
   Internet Explorer
  
  . In addition, all major web browsers have some form of built-in
  
   web feed
  

   aggregator
  
  . In
  
   Firefox
  
  , web feeds are formatted as "live bookmarks" and behave like a folder of bookmarks corresponding to recent entries in the feed.
  

    [26]
   

  In
  
   Opera
  
  , a more traditional feed reader is included which stores and displays the contents of the feed.
  

    [27]
   


  Furthermore, most browsers can be extended via
  
   plug-ins
  
  , downloadable components that provide additional features.
 
  Most major web browsers have these user interface elements in common:
  

    [28]
   


  Major browsers also possess
  
   incremental find
  
  features to search within a web page.
 
  Most browsers support
  
   HTTP Secure
  
  and offer quick and easy ways to delete the web cache, download history, form and search history,
  
   cookies
  
  , and browsing history. For a comparison of the current security vulnerabilities of browsers, see
  
   comparison of web browsers
  
  .
 
  Early web browsers supported only a very simple version of HTML. The rapid development of proprietary web browsers led to the development of non-standard dialects of HTML, leading to problems with interoperability. Modern web browsers support a combination of
  
   standards
  
  -based and
  
   de facto
  
  HTML and
  
   XHTML
  
  , which should be rendered in the same way by all browsers.
 
  A
  
   browser extension
  
  is a computer program that extends the functionality of a web browser. Every major web browser supports the development of browser extensions.
 
  Web browsers consist of a user interface,
  
   layout engine
  
  , rendering engine, JavaScript interpreter, UI backend, networking component and data persistence component. These components achieve different functionalities of a web browser and together provide all capabilities of a web browser.
  

    [29]
   





  Media related to
  
   Web browsers
  
  at Wikimedia Commons
 