


   Mac OS X Snow Leopard
  
  (version 10.6) is the seventh
  
   major release
  
  of
  
   Mac OS X (now named macOS)
  
  ,
  
   Apple
  
  's desktop and server
  
   operating system
  
  for
  
   Macintosh
  
  computers.
 
  Snow Leopard was publicly unveiled on June 8, 2009 at the
  
   Apple Worldwide Developers Conference
  
  . On August 28, 2009, it was released worldwide,
  

    [6]
   

  and was made available for purchase from Apple's website and its retail stores at the price of US$29 for a single-user license. As a result of the low price, initial sales of Snow Leopard were significantly higher than that of its predecessors.
  

    [7]
   

  The release of Snow Leopard came nearly two years after the introduction of
  
   Mac OS X Leopard
  
  , the second longest time span between successive Mac OS X releases (the time span between
  
   Tiger
  
  and Leopard was the longest).
 
  Unlike those of previous versions of Mac OS X, the goals of Snow Leopard were improved performance, greater efficiency and the reduction of its overall
  
   memory footprint
  
  . Addition of new end-user features was not a primary consideration: its name signified its goal to be a refinement of the previous OS X version,
  
   Leopard
  
  .
  

    [8]
   

  Much of the software in Mac OS X was extensively rewritten for this release in order to take advantage fully of modern
  
   Macintosh
  
  hardware. New programming frameworks, such as
  
   OpenCL
  
  , were created, allowing software developers to use
  
   graphics cards
  
  in their applications. This is also the first Mac OS release since
  
   System 7.1.1
  
  that does not support Macs using
  
   PowerPC
  
  processors, as Apple now intends to focus on
  
   its current line of Intel-based products
  
  .
  

    [9]
   

  As support for
  
   Rosetta
  
  was dropped in
  
   OS X Lion
  
  , Snow Leopard is the last version of Mac OS X that is able to run PowerPC-only applications.
 
  Snow Leopard was succeeded by
  
   Mac OS X Lion
  
  (version 10.7) on July 20, 2011.
  

    [10]
   

  Since then, Apple has continued to sell Snow Leopard from its online store for the benefit of users that require Snow Leopard in order to upgrade to later versions of OS X, which have all been distributed through the
  
   Mac App Store
  
  introduced in the Snow Leopard 10.6.6 update.
  

    [11]
   


  Snow Leopard is the last release of Mac OS X to support the 32-bit
  
   Intel Core Solo
  
  and
  
   Intel Core Duo
  

   CPUs
  
  .
 


  Apple states the following basic Snow Leopard system requirements are:
 

   Additional requirements to use certain features:
  


    [12]
   


  Snow Leopard does not support
  
   PowerPC
  
  -based Macs (e.g.,
  
   Power Macs
  
  ,
  
   PowerBooks
  
  ,
  
   iBooks
  
  ,
  
   iMacs
  
  (G3-G5), all
  
   eMacs
  
  , plus pre-February 2006
  
   Mac minis
  
  and the
  
   Power Mac G4 Cube
  
  ), although PowerPC applications are supported via
  
   Rosetta
  
  , which is now an optional install.
 
  Snow Leopard is available as an upgrade for Intel-based
  
   Macintosh
  
  computers. Single-user licenses and "family pack" licenses for up to five computers are available. For qualifying Mac computers bought after June 8, 2009, Apple offered a discounted price through their "up to date" program provided that customers' orders were faxed or postmarked by December 26, 2009. The standalone retail version of Snow Leopard is marketed as being restricted to users of
  
   Mac OS X Leopard
  
  , while the recommended upgrade path from Apple for
  
   Mac OS X Tiger
  
  is through the "Mac Box Set", which includes Mac OS X Snow Leopard and the current versions of
  
   iLife
  
  and
  
   iWork
  
  .
 
  There are three licenses available.
  

    [13]
   

  These licenses differ in their requirements for pre-installed versions of Mac OS X:
 
   If you have purchased an Upgrade for Mac OS X Leopard license, then subject to the terms and conditions of this License, you are granted a limited non-exclusive license to install, use and run one (1) copy of the Apple Software on a single Apple-branded computer as long as that computer has a properly licensed copy of Mac OS X Leopard already installed on it.
   

     [14]
    


   Subject to the terms and conditions of this License ... you are granted a limited non-exclusive license to install, use and run one (1) copy of the Apple Software on a single Apple-branded computer at a time.
   

     [14]
    


  It is not entirely clear which license is offered with the retail version of Snow Leopard. As noted above, Apple's website advertised this version as an "upgrade from Mac OS X Leopard for $29" and suggest that others upgrade using the Mac Box Set, implying the stand-alone retail version to be a "Leopard Upgrade" license. On the other hand, some Apple press materials appear to indicate that this version is, in fact, the "Single Use" license:
 
   The Snow Leopard
   
    single user license
   
   will be available for a suggested retail price of $29 (US)
   

     [15]
    

   (emphasis added)
  
  However, even if the retail edition of Snow Leopard is in fact a "Leopard Upgrade", the company has acknowledged that there is no technical barrier in that edition preventing a direct upgrade from Mac OS X "Tiger".
  

    [16]
   


  The Leopard Upgrade license explicitly applies to the Up-To-Date Program
  

    [17]
   

  (US$9.95) for Macs bought between June 8 and December 26, 2009
  

    [18]
   

  and the installation discs provided through this program are clearly marked as upgrades unlike either of the retail editions.
 
  Mac OS X Snow Leopard is intended to be a release aimed to refine the existing feature set, expand the technological capabilities of the operating system, and improve application efficiency. Many of the changes involve how the system works in the background and are not intended to be seen by the user. For example, the Finder application was completely rewritten in the
  
   Cocoa application programming interface
  
  . Despite significant changes in the software, users will experience almost no changes in the user interface. Snow Leopard includes the following changes:
 
  The 10.6.6 update introduced support for the
  
   Mac App Store
  
  , Apple's digital distribution platform for OS X applications.
  

    [24]
   


  While the
  
   Finder
  
  was completely rewritten in
  
   Cocoa
  
  , it did not receive a major user interface overhaul. Instead, the interface has been modified in several areas to promote ease of use. These changes include:
 
  As with most upgrades of Mac OS X, new wallpapers are available. There are new wallpapers in the Nature (two of which are of
  
   snow leopards
  
  ), Plants and Black and White sub-folders under the Apple folder. Furthermore, there are new Apple wallpaper sub-folders with multiple wallpapers:
 
  New solid colors can be used as wallpapers as well. There is a new blue and gray, as well as a solid kelp which serves as the "green wallpaper." The default "space nebula" wallpaper has been updated as well.
 

   Mac OS X Tiger
  
  added limited support for
  
   64-bit
  
  applications on machines with 64-bit processors;
  
   Leopard
  
  extended the support for 64-bit applications to include applications using most of Mac OS X's libraries and frameworks.
 
  In Snow Leopard, most built-in applications have been rebuilt to use the 64-bit
  
   x86-64
  

   architecture
  
  (excluding
  
   iTunes
  
  ,
  
   Front Row
  
  ,
  
   Grapher
  
  and
  
   DVD Player
  
  applications).
  

    [33]
   

  They will run in
  
   32-bit
  
  mode on machines with 32-bit processors, and in 64-bit mode on machines with 64-bit processors.
 
  In addition, the Mac OS X
  
   kernel
  
  has been rebuilt to run in 64-bit mode on some machines. On those machines, Snow Leopard supports up to 16
  
   terabytes
  
  of RAM. Newer
  
   Xserve
  
  and
  
   Mac Pro
  
  machines will run a 64-bit kernel by default; newer
  
   iMac
  
  and
  
   MacBook Pro
  
  machines can run a 64-bit kernel, but will not do so by default.
  

    [34]
   

  Users wishing to use the 64-bit kernel on those machines must hold down the numbers 6 and 4 on the keyboard while booting to get the 64-bit kernel to load.
  

    [35]
   



    [36]
   

  A change to the com.apple.Boot.plist will also enable users with compatible computers to permanently boot into 64-bit for those wishing to do so.
 
  Stuart Harris, software product marketing manager at Apple Australia, said, "For the most part, everything that they experience on the Mac, from the 64-bit point of view, the applications, the operating system, is all going to be 64-bit, but that at this stage there were very few things, such as device drivers, that required 64-bit mode at the kernel level".
  

    [36]
   


  With Mac OS X Snow Leopard only the following Apple computers run or are capable of running the 64-bit kernel:
  

    [37]
   





     ^*
    


  Amit Singh has reported that the early 2009 Mac Mini and MacBook may be capable of running the 64-bit kernel; however, Apple has set these models to boot into the 32-bit kernel. With some tweaking, the Unibody MacBook can be set to boot the 64-bit kernel.
  

    [38]
   



   Grand Central Dispatch
  
  uses the multiple processor cores now in every new Macintosh for more efficient performance. Due to the technical difficulties traditionally involved in making applications optimized for multicore CPUs, the majority of computer applications do not effectively use multiple processor cores.
  

    [39]
   

  As a result, processing power often goes unused. Grand Central Dispatch includes APIs to help programmers efficiently use these cores for parallel programming.
 
  Grand Central Dispatch shifts thread handling focus to itself rather than leaving it to specific applications to distribute jobs evenly across cores and clears up unused memory created by inactive or old threads to achieve maximum performance. Apple is also releasing APIs for Grand Central Dispatch for developers to use in their applications and also to analyze specific blocks of code running on Grand Central Dispatch.
  

    [40]
   


  A new
  
   C
  
  and
  
   Objective-C
  
  language feature named "
  
   Blocks
  
  " facilitates creation of code that will easily optimize to take advantage of Grand Central Dispatch.
  

    [41]
   



    [42]
   



    [43]
   



   OpenCL
  
  (Open Computing Language) addresses the power of
  
   graphics processing units
  
  (GPUs) to leverage them in any application, and not just for graphics-intensive applications like 3D games. OpenCL automatically optimizes for the kind of graphics processor in the Mac, adjusting itself to the available processing power. OpenCL provides consistent numeric precision and accuracy, fixing a problem that has hampered GPU-based programming in the past.
  

    [44]
   


  OpenCL includes a
  
   C
  
  -based
  
   programming language
  
  with a structure that is already familiar to Mac OS X programmers, who can use
  
   Xcode
  
  developer tools to adapt their programs to work with OpenCL. Only the most process intensive parts of the application need to be written in OpenCL C without affecting the rest of the code. OpenCL is an open standard that has been supported by
  
   AMD
  
  ,
  
   Intel
  
  , and
  
   Nvidia
  
  ; it is maintained by
  
   Khronos Group
  
  .
  

    [21]
   


  It serves a similar purpose to
  
   Nvidia
  
  's C for
  
   CUDA
  
  and
  
   Microsoft
  
  's
  
   Direct3D 11
  
  compute shaders.
 
  It only works with the following Mac GPUs: NVIDIA GeForce 320M, GT 330M, 9400M, 9600M GT, 8600M GT, GT 120, GT 130, GTX 285, 8800 GT, 8800 GS, Quadro FX 4800, FX 5600 and ATI Radeon HD 4670, HD 4850, HD 4870, HD 5670, HD 5750, HD 5770, HD 5870, HD 6490M, HD 6750M, HD 6770M, HD 6970M.
  

    [12]
   

  If the system does not possess one of these compatible GPUs, OpenCL code will instead execute on the system's CPU.
  

    [45]
   



   CUPS
  
  (the printing system used in many
  
   Unix-like
  
  operating systems) has been updated to version 1.4 which provides improved driver, networking, and
  
   Kerberos
  
  support along with performance improvements. CUPS 1.4 is also the first implementation of the
  
   Internet Printing Protocol
  
  version 2.1.
  

    [46]
   


  Power management has been improved, with implementation of a new
  
   wake on demand
  
  feature supported on more recent Macintosh hardware.
  

    [47]
   

  Wake on demand takes advantage of the
  
   sleep proxy service
  
  implemented in
  
   AirPort
  
  and
  
   Time Capsule
  
  routers,
  

    [48]
   

  so that the computer can sleep while the router responds to
  
   mDNS
  
  queries. Should the request require the host computer to
  
   wake up
  
  , the router sends the necessary special
  
   wake-up-packet
  


    [49]
   

  to the sleeping computer.
 
  Apple strengthened Mac OS X by implementing
  
   stack protection
  
  , and
  
   sandboxing
  
  more Mac OS X components such as the
  
   H.264
  

   decoder
  
  in
  
   QuickTime
  
  and browser plug-ins as a separate process in
  
   Safari
  
  .
  

    [50]
   

  An anti-
  
   malware
  
  feature was also added to the system that alerts the user if malware is detected.
  

    [51]
   

  Mac OS X 10.6.8 added regular malware definition updates.
  

    [52]
   


  Computer security researcher
  
   Charlie Miller
  
  claims that OS X Snow Leopard is more vulnerable to attack than
  
   Microsoft Windows
  
  for lacking full
  
   address space layout randomization
  
  (ASLR) since Mac OS X Leopard,
  

    [53]
   

  a technology that
  
   Microsoft
  
  started implementing in
  
   Windows Vista
  
  .
  

    [54]
   


  The
  
   Safari
  
  web browser has received updates to version 6.0 in Lion and Mountain Lion, but not in Snow Leopard.
  

    [55]
   


  Snow Leopard breaks compatibility with several older versions of some applications, such as
  
   Parallels Desktop
  
  3.0, versions of
  
   Aperture
  
  before 2.1.1, and versions of
  
   Keynote
  
  before 2.0.2, among other software.
  

    [56]
   

  Apple has also published a list of applications with known compatibility issues with Snow Leopard.
  

    [57]
   


  Printer and scanner drivers used by previous versions of Mac OS X are not compatible with Snow Leopard and will be replaced during Snow Leopard installation. Since the initial release of Snow Leopard many manufacturers have provided compatible drivers that are available via Software Update.
  

    [58]
   

  If a native driver is not available Snow Leopard also includes CUPS and
  
   Gutenprint
  
  open source drivers that may provide limited functionality.
 
  10.6.0 introduced a bug that frequently prevented
  
   DNS
  
  queries from returning
  
   IPv6 addresses
  
  .
  

    [59]
   



    [60]
   



    [61]
   

  This was resolved in 10.6.8.
  

    [62]
   


  At the
  
   WWDC
  
  in 2009, Apple stated that Snow Leopard features no new major visual changes.
  

    [63]
   

  Instead, the release focuses on refining the operating system to enable better performance.
  

    [63]
   


  OSNews reported that Mac OS X Snow Leopard was well received by critics.
  

    [64]
   



    [65]
   


  Engadget reviewed Snow Leopard and pointed out that the price of Snow Leopard dropped from the $129 Apple charged for previous versions of Mac OS X to $29. Engadget's opinion was that this could be largely because most users would not see a noticeable change in the look and feel of the system.
  

    [66]
   

  However, most reviews commented on the large improvement in speed of the native Mac OS X applications
  
   Finder
  
  ,
  
   iCal
  
  ,
  
   Mail
  
  , etc.
  

    [66]
   



   CNET
  
  editors gave it 4 stars out of 5, stating "Intel Mac users will like Snow Leopard's smartly designed interface enhancements, and its
  
   Exchange
  
  support is a must-have (especially with
  
   Outlook
  
  for Mac on the way). With a ton of technological improvements, Snow Leopard is worth the $29 upgrade fee."
  

    [67]
   


  On October 21, 2009,
  
   SFGate
  
  blogger Yobie Benjamin wrote that the "MacBook Pro that came preloaded with Snow Leopard kicks butt and is a screaming fast machine", but "when I tried to upgrade one of my 'older' MacBooks, it was a fricking disaster from hell". Apart from upgrading, Benjamin also tried a clean install. But he complained of slowness even after his clean install. He wrote, "I ended up downgrading back to OSX 10.5.8" then he concluded by writing, "I might try to do it again but it won't be till Apple releases at least 2 major fix updates. If you want to roll the dice and try, go ahead... your upgrade might work, however, random installs not working is not good for me. Lesson learned --- I'll wait."
  

    [68]
   


  The single-user upgrade and Family Pack units of Snow Leopard ranked 1 and 2 respectively on
  
   Amazon.com
  
  's software bestseller charts when Apple announced it would release it within the week.
  

    [69]
   


  Testmac.com highlighted other unexpected improvements including the release of a new version of
  
   Boot Camp
  
  , version 3.0, a cleaner, popup software update process and screen and video recording in the new
  
   QuickTime Player
  
  .
  

    [70]
   


  The BBC reported that a bug in Mac OS X versions 10.6.0 and 10.6.1 which, in rare cases, caused loss of user account data after use of a previously existing guest account by users who had upgraded from a previous version of Mac OS X, received wide publicity.
  

    [71]
   

  The bug was fixed as of version 10.6.2.
  

    [72]
   


  Former Apple CEO
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  announced Snow Leopard at
  
   WWDC
  
  on June 9, 2008,
  

    [73]
   

  and it was privately demonstrated to developers by Senior Vice President of Software Engineering
  
   Bertrand Serlet
  
  . On Monday, May 11, 2009, after build 10A354, Apple issued a
  
   code freeze
  
  on Snow Leopard's
  
   APIs
  
  .
  

    [74]
   

  The first public demonstration was given at WWDC 2009 by Serlet and Vice President of Mac OS Engineering, Craig Federighi.
  

    [9]
   



    [75]
   



   Mac OS X Server
  
  includes these features and other server-related features. Apple initially stated that Server would include
  
   ZFS
  
  support, but mention of this feature later disappeared from Apple's website and it was not included in the final release due to licensing issues.
  

    [77]
   


  On January 27, 2016,
  
   Apple
  
  released an update for the Mac App Store on Mac OS X 10.6. The update is titled "Mac App Store Update for OS X Snow Leopard". It's a 3.5MB download for the Mac App Store.
  

    [78]
   

