


   Regent Street
  
  is a major shopping street in the
  
   West End of London
  
  . It is named after
  
   George, the Prince Regent
  
  (later George IV) and was built under the direction of the architect
  
   John Nash
  
  . The street runs from Waterloo Place in
  
   St James's
  
  at the southern end, through
  
   Piccadilly Circus
  
  and
  
   Oxford Circus
  
  , to
  
   All Souls Church
  
  . From there
  
   Langham Place
  
  and
  
   Portland Place
  
  continue the route to
  
   Regent's Park
  
  .
 
  The street was completed in 1825 and was an early example of
  
   town planning
  
  in England, replacing a number of earlier roads including
  
   Swallow Street
  
  . Nash's street layout has survived, although all the original buildings except All Souls Church have been replaced following reconstruction in the late 19th century.
  

    [1]
   

  The street is known for its flagship retail stores, including
  
   Liberty
  
  ,
  
   Hamleys
  
  ,
  
   Jaeger
  
  and the
  
   Apple Store
  
  . The Royal Polytechnic Institution, now the
  
   University of Westminster
  
  , has been based on Regent Street since 1838.
 


  Regent Street is approximately 0.8 miles (1.3 km) long and begins at a junction with
  
   Charles II Street
  
  as a continuation of Waterloo Place. It runs north to
  
   Piccadilly Circus
  
  , where it turns left before curving round the Quadrant to head north again, meeting
  
   Oxford Street
  
  at
  
   Oxford Circus
  
  .
  

    [2]
   

  It ends at a junction with Cavendish Place and Mortimer Street near the
  
   BBC
  

   Broadcasting House
  
  , with the road ahead being
  
   Langham Place
  
  , followed by
  
   Portland Place
  
  .
  

    [3]
   


  The southern section of the road is
  
   one-way
  
  northbound and part of the
  
   A4
  
  , a major road through West London. From Piccadilly Circus northwards, it is numbered A4201, though in common with roads inside the
  
   London congestion charging zone
  
  , the number does not appear on signs.
  

    [3]
   


  Nearby tube stations are
  
   Charing Cross
  
  ,
  
   Piccadilly Circus
  
  and
  
   Oxford Circus
  
  ;
  

    [3]
   

  the lattermost being one of the busiest underground stations in London,
  

    [4]
   

  and is where three main lines (
  
   Central
  
  ,
  
   Bakerloo
  
  and
  
   Victoria
  
  ) meet.
  

    [5]
   

  Numerous bus routes, such as 6, 12, and 13, run along Regent Street.
  

    [6]
   


  Regent Street was one of the first planned developments of London. The desire to impose order on the city's medieval street pattern dates back to the aftermath of the
  
   Great Fire of London
  
  (1666) when Sir
  
   Christopher Wren
  
  and
  
   John Evelyn
  
  drew plans for rebuilding the city on the classical formal model, but progress was slow and houses were rebuilt on the old street network anyway.
  

    [7]
   


  In 1766,
  
   John Gwynn
  
  complained in his work
  
   London and Westminster Improved
  
  that there was a lack of planning throughout the
  
   West End
  
  and that it would be useful to construct a thoroughfare linking Marylebone Park (now
  
   Regent's Park
  
  ) with the
  
   Prince Regent
  
  's
  
   Carlton House
  
  .
  
   John Fordyce
  
  was appointed as Surveyor-General to the
  
   First Commissioner of Woods and Forests
  
  in 1793 and concluded that there should be a suitable road in place by 1811, when the lease for Marylebone Park ran out and ownership reverted to the Crown. It was hoped the road could link
  
   Pall Mall
  
  and the
  
   Haymarket
  
  , of which has since declined in quality. A further problem was increased congestion around
  
   Charing Cross
  
  , which would benefit from road improvements.
  

    [8]
   


  The street was designed by
  
   John Nash
  
  , who had been appointed to the Office of Woods and Forests in 1806 and previously served as an adviser to the Prince Regent. He put forward his own plans for the street in 1810 following the death of Fordyce,
  

    [8]
   

  envisioning broad, architecturally distinguished thoroughfares and public spaces.
  

    [9]
   


  Nash originally wanted to construct a straight boulevard in the same style seen in French cities, but this was not possible because of issues with land ownership.
  

    [10]
   

  The final design resulted in the road being situated further west than previous plans, and Nash believed the road would run down a
  
   de facto
  
  line separating the upper classes and nobility in
  
   Mayfair
  
  with the working class in
  
   Soho
  
  .
  

    [8]
   

  The northern section involved demolishing most of the existing
  
   Swallow Street
  
  , which had become run down and was an ideal candidate for regeneration.
  

    [11]
   

  The road was designed to curve east between Oxford Street and Piccadilly so that it did not meet
  
   St James's Square
  
  , and the circuses allowed visual continuity down the street.
  

    [8]
   

  The central section, known as the Quadrant, was designed for "shops appropriated to articles of fashion and taste," and was Nash's centrepiece design of the entire street. It was built with a
  
   colonnade
  
  made out of cast-iron columns, allowing commuters to walk along the street without having to face bad weather. The various buildings along the Quadrant had different facades, which was a deliberate choice by Nash to break away from the uniform design of the previous century, as well as a pragmatic means of using what building materials were available and what clients wanted.
  

    [12]
   

  The road was planned to end outside
  
   Carlton House
  
  in Pall Mall, the residence of the Prince of Wales.
  

    [10]
   

  Nash insisted that businesses on the new street would be of high-quality, rivalling that of the nearby
  
   Bond Street
  
  ; common trades such as butchers or greengrocers were not allowed.
  

    [13]
   


  The design was adopted by an Act of Parliament in 1813, which permitted the commissioners to borrow £600,000 for building and construction. The street was intended to have commercial purposes and it was expected that a majority of the income would come from private capital. Nash took responsibility for design and valuation of all properties.
  

    [8]
   

  Construction of the road resulted in demolishing numerous properties, disrupting trade and polluting the air with dust.
  

    [14]
   

  Existing tenants had first offer to purchase leases on the new properties.
  

    [12]
   

  The Treasury supported the proposal because, in the aftermath of the lengthy
  
   Napoleonic Wars
  
  , there was an urgent need for the government to create jobs. Government expenditure was low because the design relied heavily upon private developers, such as Nash himself.
  

    [15]
   

  The buildings were to be let on 99-year leases, as was common at the time, and income could be recouped in the form of ground rent.
  

    [16]
   


  Although Nash was responsible for the street's general development, some individual buildings were designed by
  
   Charles Robert Cockerell
  
  and
  
   Sir John Soane
  
  , amongst others. By 1819, the Crown were receiving regular rent and the street was becoming established.
  

    [12]
   

  At first, it was called New Street and became a dividing line between
  
   Soho
  
  , which had declined socially and economically, and the fashionable squares and streets of
  
   Mayfair
  
  to the west.
  

    [17]
   

  Carlton House did not last long following completion of the works and was demolished in 1829, to be replaced by
  
   Carlton House Terrace
  
  , also designed by Nash.
  

    [10]
   


  Regent Street became the first shopping area in Britain to support late night opening in 1850, when shopkeepers agreed to keep stores open until 7pm.
  

    [18]
   


  During the 19th century, Regent Street became established as the "centre of fashion." Shops expanded into multiple properties, selling imported and exotic products to appeal to niche consumers.
  

    [12]
   

  By the end of the century, fashions had changed and the original buildings were small and old fashioned, restricting trade.
  

    [19]
   

  The colonnade constructed by Nash was demolished in the mid-19th century for fear it might attract "doubtful characters."
  

    [17]
   

  Other buildings were not up to modern building standards; some had been extended and were structurally suspect.
  

    [10]
   

  As the 99-year leases came to an end, Regent Street was redeveloped between 1895 and 1927 under the control of the Office of Woods, Forests and Land Revenues (now known as the
  
   Crown Estate
  
  ).
  

    [1]
   



    [20]
   


  The modern Regent Street is the result of this redevelopment. No original structures survive except south of Oxford Circus for some Nash-designed sewers.
  

    [18]
   

  The current design is an example of the
  
   Beaux Arts
  
  approach to urban design: an assembly of separate buildings on a grand scale, designed to harmonise and produce an impressive overall effect.
  

    [21]
   

  Strict rules governed the reconstruction.
  

    [19]
   

  Each block had to be designed with a continuous unifying street façade and finished in Portland stone.
  

    [21]
   

  The first redevelopment was Regent House, just south of Oxford Circus. The stylistic tone for the rebuilding was set by
  
   Sir Reginald Blomfield
  
  's Quadrant.
  

    [20]
   


  The architect
  
   Norman Shaw
  
  , then aged 73, was brought in to draw up proposals for the Circus and the Quadrant after early plans were felt to be unsatisfactory. His scheme was approved in principle but subject to indecision and dispute, both on property acquisition and retailers' demand for bigger display windows.
  

    [19]
   

  Shaw's design for the Piccadilly Hotel was completed in 1908 with modifications, while the Quadrant was rebuilt by Blomfield, adapting Shaw's designs. The work started in 1923 and was completed by 1928.
  

    [20]
   

  Significantly, no accommodation was built above any of the retail properties, contributing to the demise of the West End as a place of residence.
  

    [22]
   

  A limited number of architects were responsible for the redesigned street, including
  
   Sir John James Burnet
  
  ,
  

    [23]
   


   Arthur Joseph Davis
  


    [24]
   

  and
  
   Henry Tanner
  
  .
  

    [25]
   


  Work was delayed by
  
   World War I
  


    [19]
   

  and it was not until 1927 that its completion was celebrated by
  
   King George V
  
  and
  
   Queen Mary
  
  driving in state along its length.
  

    [22]
   

  The only remaining Nash building is All Souls Church and all the buildings on the street are at least Grade II
  
   listed
  
  . All the properties are in the Regent Street Conservation Area.
  

    [26]
   


  By the 1970s, Regent Street had started to decline because of under-investment and competition from neighbouring areas such as Oxford Street or shopping centres away from Central London. In 2002, the
  
   Crown Estate
  
  , which owns most of Regent Street on behalf of the Queen, started a major redevelopment programme.
  

    [27]
   

  In 2013 the Estate sold a quarter of the 270,000-square-foot (25,000 m
  
   2
  
  ) Regent Street Quadrant 3 building to the
  
   Norwegian Oil Fund
  
  ,
  

    [28]
   

  while later that year,
  
   Hackett London
  
  bought the lease for the
  
   Ferrari
  
  store on Regent Street for £4m. Smaller shops have been replaced by larger units; the street is now the flagship location of several major brands, including
  
   Apple
  
  and
  
   Banana Republic
  
  .
  

    [27]
   


  The largest part of the plan was the reconstruction of the Quadrant close to Piccadilly Circus, which was completed in 2011. It offers 200,000 square feet (19,000 m
  
   2
  
  ) of office space spanning over seven floors. Two
  
   Art Deco
  
  -designed restaurants have also been restored, and the development includes a small number of apartments.
  

    [29]
   

  The Crown Estate moved its own headquarters from
  
   Carlton House Terrace
  
  to Regent Street in 2006.
  

    [30]
   


  The
  
   department store
  

   Dickins and Jones
  
  was established at No. 54
  
   Oxford Street
  
  as Dickins and Smith before moving to Nos. 232–234 Regent Street in 1835. It was renamed to Dickins and Jones in the 1890s after John Pritchard Jones became a business partner, and by the turn of the 20th century employed over 200 people. It became part of the
  
   Harrods
  
  group in 1914, and expanded to cover Nos. 224–244 in 1922, in a new building designed by
  
   Sir Henry Tanner
  
  . In 1959,
  
   House of Fraser
  
  took over the store by buying the Harrods group.
  

    [31]
   

  In 2005, House of Fraser announced that the store would close the following year, after it had been making a loss for several years and not kept up with more fashion-conscious department stores elsewhere. The building has been redeveloped with small shop units on the lower floors and flats and offices above.
  

    [31]
   



    [32]
   


  The
  
   Liberty
  
  department store is based at Nos. 210–220. It was founded by entrepreneur
  
   Arthur Lasenby Liberty
  
  , who had been inspired by the
  
   1862 International Exhibition
  
  and wanted to open an oriental warehouse. He opened his first shop, East India House in 1875 at No. 218a, selling silk garments and various oriental goods. The shop expanded into other properties on Regent Street in the 1880s, separated by a jeweller's shop which was bridged by a double staircase called the "Camel's Back." Liberty later took over all of Nos. 140–150 Regent Street.
  

    [33]
   

  In 1925, this complex was replaced by two new buildings, and a
  
   mock tudor
  
  building (built by architects
  
   Edwin T. Hall
  
  and his son Edwin S. Hall, constructed from the timbers of two ships, the
  
   HMS Impregnable
  
  , and the
  
   HMS Hindustan
  
  ) on neighbouring
  
   Great Marlborough Street
  
  connected by a footbridge over
  
   Kingly Street
  
  , which separates the properties.
  

    [33]
   


  The toy store
  
   Hamleys
  
  is at No. 188 Regent Street, just south of Oxford Circus. It was founded as Noah's Ark at No. 231
  
   High Holborn
  
  in 1760.
  

    [34]
   

  An additional branch opened at Nos. 64–66 Regent Street in 1881, while the original High Holborn building burned down in 1901, moving to Nos. 86–87. The store was frequently the first to market the latest games and toys, and became a strong seller of
  
   table tennis
  
  equipment in the late 19th century, allowing the sport to become popular. The business moved to Nos. 200–202,
  

    [35]
   

  and moved to the current address in 1981. It claims to be the largest toy shop in the world.
  

    [36]
   


  The main London branch of the clothing store
  
   Jaeger
  
  is at Nos. 200–206 Regent Street. It was founded in 1884 by Lewis Tomalin, who was inspired by
  
   naturalist
  

   Gustav Jäger
  
  's pioneering use of anti-animal fibre-based clothing. The first shop, on
  
   Fore Street
  
  , had "Doctor Jaeger's Sanitary Woollen System" inscribed above the door.
  
   Oscar Wilde
  
  was a regular visitor to the shop.
  
   Henry Morton Stanley
  
  is known to have worn Jaeger clothing during his search for
  
   Dr. David Livingstone
  
  in Africa, as is
  
   Robert Falcon Scott
  
  on his fated trip to the
  
   South Pole
  
  . The company moved to Regent Street in 1935.
  

    [37]
   


  The
  
   Apple retail store
  
  opened on Regent Street on 20 November 2004. At the time, this was the first such store in Europe,
  

    [38]
   

  with the others being in the United States and Japan. It was the largest Apple store worldwide until the opening of an even larger store in
  
   Covent Garden
  
  in August 2010.
  

    [39]
   



   Austin Reed
  
  's flagship store was at Nos. 103–113 Regent Street for more than 85 years.
  

    [40]
   

  It had an atrium at its centre, housing glass lifts allowing viewing across all floors. The lower ground floor sold womenswear and also housed Austin's, the refurbished
  
   Art Deco
  
  Barber Shop.
  

    [41]
   

  In May 2011, the British fashion retailer
  
   Superdry
  
  announced it would move into the building, paying £12m for the lease. In return, Austin Reed moved to a former
  
   Aquascutum
  
  shop on the other side of the road.
  

    [42]
   

  In 2016, Austin Reed filed for
  
   administration
  
  , ending over 100 years' presence on Regent Street.
  

    [43]
   


  Immediately north of Regent Street is the
  
   BBC
  
  's headquarters,
  
   Broadcasting House
  
  , whose front entrance is in Langham Place. Several national radio stations are broadcast from this building. The site had formerly been a building on the gardens of Foley House designed by
  
   James Wyatt
  
  and called Wyatt's House. It was demolished in 1928 (with much of the fixtures ending up in the
  
   Victoria and Albert Museum
  
  ) to construct Broadcasting House. Construction was challenging because the building had to be visually similar to other properties on Regent Street, yet also contain over twenty
  
   soundproofed
  
  studios. The exterior is built of
  
   Portland stone
  
  and above the front entrance is a sculpture by
  
   Eric Gill
  
  .
  

    [44]
   


  Broadcasting House was first used by the BBC on 2 May 1932, and total construction costs were £350,000. It was too small for all services, and St George's Hall, next to All Souls, was used for variety broadcasts until it was demolished during
  
   the Blitz
  
  . On 15 October 1940, the building took a direct hit, killing seven people, and later that year a landmine exploded on Portland Place, causing widespread fires in Broadcasting House. Despite the damage, it survived the war and became one of the best known buildings associated with radio broadcasting. Subsequently, the BBC expanded with additional studios at
  
   Maida Vale
  
  ,
  

    [44]
   

  followed by the former
  

    [45]
   

  headquarters of
  
   BBC Television
  
  ,
  
   BBC Television Centre
  
  at
  
   Wood Lane
  
  .
  

    [44]
   

  In the 2000s, Broadcasting House was expanded to include a new wing and modernise the site, replacing earlier extensions. It was designed by
  
   MacCormac Jamieson Prichard
  
  .
  

    [46]
   

  Originally named the Egton Wing, it was renamed to the
  
   John Peel
  
  Wing in 2012, in memory of the radio broadcaster.
  

    [47]
   


  The
  
   Paris Theatre
  
  was located in a converted cinema in Lower Regent Street, near other BBC buildings. Several
  
   rock groups
  
  performed live concerts here, including
  
   The Beatles
  
  ,
  
   Queen
  
  and
  
   Pink Floyd
  
  , which were simultaneously recorded for broadcast. The BBC stopped using the theatre in 1995.
  

    [48]
   


  The
  
   University of Westminster
  
  's main campus at No. 309 Regent Street was founded in 1838 under
  
   George Cayley
  
  and rebuilt under
  
   Quintin Hogg
  
  in 1911. It is one of the oldest educational institutions in Central London.
  

    [49]
   

  Historically, the University was once also titled as the
  
   Royal Polytechnic Institution
  
  (after a royal charter had been formally received in August 1839
  

    [50]
   

  and
  
   Prince Albert
  
  became a patron to the institution). It has also been called "The Polytechnic at Regent Street" and the
  
   Polytechnic of Central London
  
  (PCL).
  

    [51]
   

  The University houses the
  
   Regent Street Cinema
  
  which acted as a platform for major scientists, artists and authors such as
  
   Charles Dickens
  
  ,
  

    [52]
   


   John Henry Pepper
  
  ,
  

    [53]
   

  and The Lumière Brothers (
  
   Auguste and Louis Lumière
  
  ) where public and private screenings of Cinématographe were shown to an audience.
  

    [54]
   

  The cinema was restored and reopened to the public in May 2015.
  

    [55]
   



   All Souls Church
  
  is at the top of Regent Street next to Broadcasting House. It was built in 1823 out of
  
   Bath stone
  
  and consecrated in 1824, and is the only surviving building in Regent Street that was designed by John Nash.
  

    [18]
   



    [56]
   


  The
  
   Café Royal
  
  , located at 68 Regent Street in the Quadrant, was opened in 1865 by
  
   Daniel Nicols
  
  and became an institution of London high society. In 1895
  
   Oscar Wilde
  
  argued with
  
   Frank Harris
  
  in the café about his proposal to sue the
  
   Marquess of Queensberry
  
  for libel over Wilde's alleged homosexuality. Wilde went ahead with the trial, which ultimately led to his own arrest and imprisonment. The present building, by Sir Reginald Blomfield, dates from 1928 and is Grade II listed. It was closed in 2008 and the building which houses the café was bought by a subsidiary of
  
   Alrov Group
  
  ,
  

    [57]
   

  as a part of Crown Estate's plans to redevelop this part of Regent Street.
  

    [58]
   

  It is the oldest shop on Regent Street.
  

    [26]
   


  Regent Street is home to several events throughout the year.
  

    [59]
   

  The Regent Street Festival happens annually, and during this time, the street is closed to traffic.
  

    [60]
   

  In September, there is a series of fashion-related events, dubbed as Fashion and Design Month (FDM), which has been running since 2015.
  

    [61]
   



    [62]
   

  In an interview with David Shaw, the head of the
  
   Regent Street Portfolio
  
  , he said that for FDM 2016, they worked with many "talented individuals across a variety of events, combining creative talent with our established stores."
  

    [61]
   


  There have been
  
   Christmas lights
  
  on Regent Street in various forms since 1882.
  

    [18]
   

  The current regular displays date from 1948, when the Regent Street Association decorated the street with trees.
  

    [63]
   

  Since 1954, the Regent Street Association have arranged annual Christmas lights. There is a different display every year and the switching on ceremony occurs during November.
  

    [64]
   


  On 6 July 2004, half a million people crowded into Regent Street and the surrounding streets to watch a parade of
  
   Formula One
  
  cars.
  

    [65]
   

  In 2016, the sport's chief manager,
  
   Bernie Ecclestone
  
  , speculated that a London Grand Prix may potentially happen in the future, including Regent Street as a part of the circuit.
  

    [66]
   


  The character Lord Frederick Verisopht in
  
   Charles Dickens
  
  '
  

    Nicholas Nickelby
   

  lived in an apartment in Regent Street. This reflected the nature of the street in the mid-19th century when it was still a fashionable residence for the upper class.
  

    [67]
   


  In August 1839, the first British commercial production of
  
   daguerreotype
  
  photographs were carried out in a property on Regent Street, shortly after the process had been publicly documented.
  

    [11]
   


  Regent Street is a location on the British version of
  

    Monopoly
   

  as a group of three green squares with Oxford Street and
  
   Bond Street
  
  . The three properties are grouped together as they are all known for their retail and commercial backgrounds.
  

    [68]
   



   Notes
  


   Citations
  


   Sources
  
