


   FairPlay
  
  is a
  
   digital rights management
  
  (DRM) technology created by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  , based on technology created by the company
  
   Veridisc
  
  . FairPlay is built into the
  
   QuickTime
  
  multimedia software and used by the
  
   iPhone
  
  ,
  
   iPod
  
  ,
  
   iPad
  
  ,
  
   Apple TV
  
  ,
  
   iTunes
  
  ,
  
   iTunes Store
  
  and the
  
   App Store
  
  . Formerly, all
  
   songs
  
  in the iTunes Store were encoded with FairPlay. Apple later started offering a selection of songs, that after an additional 30
  
   cents
  
  per song is charged, could be downloaded FairPlay-free.
  

    [1]
   

  Apple no longer sells individual songs or
  
   albums
  
  with FairPlay
  
   encryption
  
  from the iTunes store.
  

    [2]
   

  However,
  
   apps
  
  downloaded from the iTunes store and
  
   Apple Music
  
  subscription songs saved for
  
   offline
  
  listening are still encrypted with FairPlay.
  

    [3]
   



    [4]
   

  FairPlay digitally encrypts
  
   AAC
  

   audio files
  
  and prevents
  
   users
  
  from playing these files on unauthorized
  
   computers
  
  .
 
  The majority of FairPlay-encrypted content is purchased through the iTunes Store, using the iTunes software. The iTunes software relies on Apple's QuickTime multimedia software for
  
   decoding
  
  and playback of the encrypted files. Every
  
   media player
  
  capable of using QuickTime is capable of playing back FairPlay-encrypted files, including
  
   RealPlayer
  
  ,
  
   JRiver Media Center
  
  ,
  
   Media Player Classic
  
  and
  
   Songbird
  
  .
  

    [5]
   




  FairPlay-protected files are regular
  
   MP4
  

   container files
  
  with an encrypted
  
   AAC
  

   audio stream
  
  . The audio stream is encrypted using the
  
   AES
  

   algorithm
  
  in combination with
  
   MD5
  

   hashes
  
  . The master key required to decrypt the encrypted audio stream is also stored in encrypted form in the MP4 container file. The key required to decrypt the master key is called the "user key".
  

    [6]
   


  Each time a new customer uses iTunes to buy a track, a new random user key is generated and used to encrypt the master key. The random user key is stored, together with the account information, on Apple’s
  
   servers
  
  , and also sent to iTunes. iTunes stores these keys in its own encrypted key repository. Using this key repository, iTunes is able to retrieve the user key required to decrypt the master key. Using the master key, iTunes is able to decrypt the AAC audio stream and play it.
 
  When a user authorizes a new computer, iTunes sends a unique machine
  
   identifier
  
  to Apple’s servers. In return, it receives all the user keys that are stored with the account information. This ensures that Apple is able to limit the number of computers that are authorized and makes sure that each authorized computer has all the user keys that are needed to play the tracks they bought.
 
  When a user deauthorizes a computer, iTunes will instruct Apple’s servers to remove the unique machine identifier from their
  
   database
  
  , and at the same time it will remove all the user keys from the deauthorized computer's encrypted key repository.
 
  The iPod also has its own encrypted key repository. Every time a FairPlay-protected track is copied onto the iPod, iTunes will copy the user key from its own key repository to the key repository on the iPod. This makes sure that the iPod has everything it needs to play the encrypted AAC audio stream.
 
  FairPlay does not affect the ability of the file itself to be copied. It only manages the decryption of the audio content.
 
  FairPlay-encrypted audio tracks allow the following:
 
  At this time, it appears that the restrictions mentioned above are
  
   hard-coded
  
  into QuickTime and the iTunes application, and not configurable in the protected files themselves.
 
  FairPlay prevents iTunes
  
   customers
  
  from using the purchased music directly on any
  
   portable digital music player
  
  other than the
  
   Apple iPod
  
  ,
  
   Motorola ROKR E1
  
  ,
  
   Motorola SLVR
  
  ,
  
   Motorola RAZR V3i
  
  , the
  
   iPhone
  
  and the
  
   iPad
  
  .
 
  On January 3, 2005, an iTunes
  
   online music store
  
  customer, Thomas Slattery, filed a
  
   lawsuit
  
  against
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  , alleging the company broke
  
   antitrust laws
  
  by using FairPlay with iTunes, so that purchased music will work only with its own music player, the iPod, freezing out competitors.
  

    [9]
   

  Though most of the complaints were dropped, the case was combined with two other lawsuits and continued under the temporary name "The Apple iPod iTunes Antitrust Litigation".
  

    [10]
   

  In December 2014 an eight-member jury unanimously found in Apple's favour.
  

    [11]
   


  On June 28, 2004,
  
   VirginMega
  
  filed a complaint with the
  
   French Competition Council
  
  against Apple, regarding its refusal to license FairPlay to VirginMega for use in their own
  
   online music commerce store
  
  . The Council (
  
   Conseil
  
  ) rejected the complaint over accused anti-competitive behavior.
  

    [12]
   

  The Conseil ruled against the notion that FairPlay was an "
  
   essential facility
  
  " for three distinct reasons:
 
  After the launch of the iTunes Store, multiple people attempted to circumvent the encryption of FairPlay-protected files.
 

   Jon Johansen
  
  – also known for his
  
   DeCSS
  
  program – was the first to devise a way to circumvent the DRM. The
  
   open source
  
  application
  
   QTFairUse
  
  intercepted the decrypted output and wrote it to a raw AAC file. Many media players do not support such raw files and the files had to be processed with a tool like
  
   FAAD
  
  to create normal files. One of the few media players that is able to play raw AAC files is
  
   foobar2000
  
  .
 
  The second time around, Johansen
  
   reverse engineered
  
  the encryption technique used in FairPlay and created an algorithm to completely remove the encryption without re-encoding the encrypted AAC stream. This method was also used by
  
   VLC media player
  
  in order to play FairPlay-protected tracks, until a newer version of iTunes and FairPlay broke it.
 
  Only a few days after the release of iTunes 7.0 the experimental version 2.3 of QTFairUse6, a derivative of the python open source
  
   QTFairUse
  
  , was released which dumps each track to a raw AAC file which then can be converted to any format.
 
  Jon Johansen himself also released a tool to remove the encryption, called DeDRMS. Later he released FairKeys, which uses Apple’s own servers to retrieve the keys needed by DeDRMS.
 
  All these applications have two things in common. First, they employ the user keys from either the Apple servers, the iTunes key repository, or the iPod key repository, which ensures they can decrypt only files that are legally bought; a user cannot use these applications to decrypt files that another user bought. Second, they keep user specific metadata inside the MP4 container intact, so it is possible to identify the user who originally bought the file after it is decrypted.
 
  In March 2005, it was revealed through a front end of the iTunes Store called
  
   PyMusique
  
  that the FairPlay DRM was added only as a song was being purchased from the store by the client software itself.
 
  In October 2006,
  
   Jon Johansen
  
  announced that instead of breaking FairPlay, he had reverse-engineered it so that other companies could play their DRM-protected music and movies on iPods and Apple's new
  
   Apple TV
  
  . His company,
  
   doubleTwist
  
  , would license the technology to media companies who wished to have their media playable on the iPod or Apple TV, with the protection of FairPlay DRM, but without having to go through Apple.
  

    [14]
   


  A software package named
  
   PlayFair
  
  – created by an anonymous author – also appeared. It can remove the encryption from files using the FairPlay DRM mechanism. The author of Playfair used the
  
   source code
  
  written by Jon Johansen for VLC. Apple's legal department forced PlayFair to be first removed from
  
   SourceForge.net
  
  , and then, when the Indian
  
   open source
  

   website
  
  Sarovar.org hosted the project, they too were sent a
  
   cease and desist
  
  by Apple's
  
   lawyers
  
  . However, Playfair's successor
  
   Hymn
  
  (a
  
   backronym
  
  for "
  
   H
  
  ear
  
   Y
  
  our
  
   M
  
  usic a
  
   N
  
  ywhere") has become JHymn, a
  
   Java
  
  variant of the program, and iOpener, a
  
   Windows
  
  variant.
 
  Apple Computer introduced iTunes 6.0 in October 2005, which included changes intended to stop programs like JHymn from decrypting FairPlay encrypted files. Furthermore, once iTunes 6 has been used to purchase songs or authorize a computer with a particular iTMS (iTunes Music Store) account, that account will be blocked from making purchases or activations on earlier iTunes versions, thus JHymn can no longer be used.
  

    [15]
   


  Apple Computer introduced iTunes 7.0 in September 2006, which once again included changes intended to stop programs similar to JHymn.
 
  In July 2004,
  
   RealNetworks
  
  introduced their Harmony technology. The Harmony technology is built into
  
   RealPlayer
  
  and allows users of the
  
   RealPlayer Music Store
  
  to play their songs on the
  
   iPod
  
  . Before the introduction of Harmony this was not possible, because the RealPlayer Music Store uses a different DRM scheme, called
  
   Helix DRM
  
  , that was incompatible with that used by Apple. While using RealPlayer to transfer a Helix DRM-restricted song onto the iPod, Harmony transparently converts it to a FairPlay-compatible protected file. Real argued that Harmony was a boon to consumers that "frees" them "from the limitation of being locked into a specific portable device when they buy digital music."
  

    [16]
   

  Apple responded:
 
  RealNetworks launched an
  
   internet petition
  
  titled "Hey Apple! Don't break my iPod", encouraging iPod users to sign up to support Real's action. The petition backfired badly.
  

    [17]
   

  The overwhelming majority of posters reacted negatively. The main points of criticism against Harmony were:
 
  Apple did disable Harmony around the time of the
  
   iPod photo
  
  launch, and to older versions shortly after in firmware updates. The change makes it so that all music (past and present) purchased through the
  
   RealPlayer Music Store
  
  will not work on Apple's
  
   iPod
  
  . In response, Real said they would get it working again.
 
  In August 2005, an
  
   SEC filing
  
  by RealNetworks disclosed that continued use of the Harmony technology put themselves at considerable risk because of the possibility of a
  
   lawsuit
  
  from Apple, which would be expensive to defend against, even if the court agreed that the technology is legal. Additionally, the possibility that "Apple will continue to modify its technology to 'break' the interoperability that Harmony provides to consumers" would mean that "Harmony may no longer work with Apple's products, which could harm our business and reputation, or we may be forced to incur additional development costs to refine Harmony to make it interoperate again."
  

    [18]
   


  Harmony never resurfaced as an option by RealNetworks.
 
  Requiem was originally released by "Brahms" as version 1.0 in February 2008, and version 1.8.17 was released in early 2010. Requiem allows a person to decrypt music, movies, and e-books that they are authorized to play in iTunes by reverse-engineering Apple's FairPlay algorithm. Requiem does not remove identification tags from songs. However, there are other methods to remove them.
  

    [19]
   


  Requiem works by decrypting the iTunes configuration files that are in "/Users/Shared/SC Info". In Mac OS X, the key to decrypt these config files is an obfuscated version of the
  
   MAC address
  
  of one's computer. In Windows, an amalgamation of hard drive volume information and registry keys are used instead of the MAC address. The initialization variable for this decryption is a
  
   hard coded
  
  constant. The program then decrypts the keys in the config files as well as the private atoms in the audio/video files and creates unencrypted versions.
  

    [20]
   

  An updated
  
   iTunes 7.6.2
  
  disabled Requiem, however, versions 1.4 and 1.5 again circumvented the protection. Apple again disabled Requiem with
  
   iTunes 8
  
  , but the author released version 1.8.2 which circumvents iTunes 8 DRM on Mac OS and Microsoft Windows systems. Apple responded by releasing iTunes 8.0.2, which again disabled Requiem.
 
  Apple has taken steps to remove references to Requiem from the JHymn forums. A JHymn forums explained Apple's
  
   cease and desist
  
  order against the forum regarding posting information on circumvention technologies like Requiem. Since the C&D order, the author of Requiem initially made it available with source code on the anonymous
  
   Freenet
  
  network, but then moved it to a
  
   Tor
  

   hidden service
  
  . From there it has been copied onto popular
  
   BitTorrent
  
  public trackers, such as
  
   The Pirate Bay
  
  .
 
  On March 16, 2009, the day that iTunes 8.1 was released,
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  Requiem was updated several times, ending up with version 1.8.8. Requiem 1.8.8 decrypts files with iTunes 8.1.0.51, but, as before, Apple responded by releasing iTunes 8.1.0.52, which appears to again disable Requiem. As of May 5, 2009, Requiem 1.8.10 decrypts files with iTunes 8.1.1. On January 5, 2010, Requiem 1.8.16 was released for iTunes 9.0.2.
  

    [21]
   

  On January 21, 2010, Requiem 1.8.17 was released for iTunes 9.0.2 as a bug-fix to process files with a size greater than 4GB.
  

    [22]
   

  Versions 2.X, updated for iTunes 10, required use of an iPod, iPhone, or iPad to decrypt music. Apple plans to have iTunes update the DRM coding on videos bought from the iTunes Store automatically by checking the files to see if the coding is up to date. Requiem 3.1 was released for Mac only, and does away with the need for an iOS device. It has been updated to version 3.3 (Mac & Windows) to support iTunes 10.5.3, and now also removes the DRM on Apple's ePub format ebooks. Since then it has been updated to version 4.0 to support removing DRM from 1080p iTunes TV shows. 4.0.1 was issued shortly after as a bug fix. Its final update, 4.1, was issued to remove easy bugs. Brahms stated the following: "Requiem 4.1 will be my last official release, barring any obvious bugs that are easy to fix."
 
  There are methods to bypass the DRM control:
 



  On February 6, 2007,
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  , then-
  
   CEO
  
  of Apple Inc., published an
  
   open letter
  
  entitled
  
   Thoughts on Music
  
  on the Apple website, calling on the "big four"
  
   music companies
  
  to sell their music without DRM.
  

    [23]
   

  According to Jobs, Apple does not want to use DRM, but is forced by the four major musical labels, with whom Apple
  
   negotiates
  

   contracts
  
  for iTunes. Jobs's main points were:
 
  Jobs' letter was met with some
  
   praise
  
  , but many others
  
   criticized
  
  Apple's
  
   hypocritical
  
  approach to DRM. While openly criticizing DRM, Apple has been actively threatening or
  
   suing
  
  anybody trying to open their own DRM or make it
  
   interoperable
  
  . Critics claim that this is not because Apple is afraid of illegal copies, but because it gives them an advantage in their market position as a leader in both electronic music sales (iTunes) and in music players (iPod), reinforcing each other due to the FairPlay DRM.
  

    [24]
   



    [25]
   



    [26]
   



    [27]
   


  The essay caused ripples across the industries with a stake in the success or failure of DRM. Responses include those from
  
   Jon Lech Johansen
  
  on February 6,
  
   MP3.com
  
  founder
  
   Michael Robertson
  
  and the
  
   Free Software Foundation
  
  on February 8,
  

    [28]
   


   Warner Music
  
  boss
  
   Edgar Bronfman
  
  and the open DRM
  
   Coral Consortium
  
  on February 9, head of
  
   Yahoo Music
  

   Dave Goldberg
  
  on February 11, and
  
   Fred Amoroso
  
  of Macrovision on February 16.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  The famous decoder of the
  
   Content Scramble System
  
  ,
  
   Jon Lech Johansen
  
  , criticized Jobs' statistical evidence that users are not locked into using the
  
   iPod
  
  by using the
  
   iTunes Store
  
  to download music with
  
   Apple Computer
  
  's FairPlay (DRM).
  

    [29]
   


  In a
  
   conference call
  
  on the earnings of
  
   Warner Music Group Corp.
  
  , CEO
  
   Edgar Bronfman
  
  argued in favour of DRM, claiming that DRM and interoperability are not mutually exclusive.
  

    [30]
   


  A multi-industry group working on creating interoperability between DRM formats, the
  
   Coral Consortium
  
  , responded with an invitation to incorporate their technical specifications for interoperability into the iTunes framework.
  

    [31]
   


  In the Silicon Valley Watcher, Tom Foremski interviewed
  
   Yahoo Music
  
  head
  
   Dave Goldberg
  
  , who advocated removing DRM from music altogether.
  

    [32]
   


  CEO and President of
  
   Macrovision Corporation
  

   Fred Amoroso
  
  posted his own open letter in response to Steve Jobs's. In his reply, Amoroso argued that DRM increases both consumer value and electronic distribution by giving users choices (e.g.
  
   rent
  
  vs.
  
   buy
  
  ). He also argues in favor of interoperable and "open" DRM.
  

    [33]
   


  On April 2, 2007, Steve Jobs and
  
   EMI
  
  announced DRM-free music for EMI's complete music library for a 30
  
   ¢
  
  premium above the standard fee.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  This began in May 2007. Soon after,
  
   Amazon.com
  
  began selling unrestricted music files for 99¢ and Apple dropped the price of its DRM-free music back to 99¢.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  On January 6, 2009 Apple announced at the 2009
  
   Macworld Conference & Expo
  
  that they had reached an agreement with major record labels to sell all music on the iTunes Store free of DRM restrictions. Eight million tracks were available with FairPlay restrictions removed from that day,
  

    [34]
   

  with the remainder of the music store to be DRM-free by the end of March 2009. However,
  
   movies
  
  ,
  
   books
  
  , apps,
  

    [35]
   

  and
  
   television shows
  
  purchased from the iTunes Store still contain FairPlay restrictions.
  

    [36]
   

