

  The
  
   iPod Shuffle
  
  (stylized and marketed as
  
   iPod shuffle
  
  ) is a digital audio player designed and marketed by
  
   Apple Inc
  
  . It is the smallest model in Apple's
  
   iPod
  
  family, and was the first iPod to use
  
   flash memory
  
  . The first model was announced at the
  
   Macworld Conference & Expo
  
  on January 11, 2005; the current fourth generation model was introduced on September 1, 2010.
  

    [1]
   




  Released on January 11, 2005, the first-generation iPod Shuffle weighed 0.78 ounces (22 g), and was designed to be easily loaded with a selection of songs and to play them in random order. According to Apple,
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  owners of existing iPods had often left the music selection to "shuffle", and the new iPod Shuffle was a way of implementing that in a much more cost-effective fashion. It relied on the use of an "autofill" feature in
  
   iTunes
  
  , which selected songs at random from a user's music library (or from a specific playlist) and copied as many as would fit into the iPod Shuffle's storage. The first generation could hold up to 240 songs (1 GB model, based on Apple's estimate, of four minutes per song and 128
  
   kbit/s
  

   AAC
  
  encoding). It used the
  
   SigmaTel
  
  STMP35xx
  
   system on a chip
  
  (SOC) and its software development kit (SDK) v2.6, a flash memory IC, and USB rechargeable lithium cell. The STMP35xx SOC and its software was the most fully integrated portable MP3 playback system at release time and SigmaTel was Austin's largest IPO (2003) capturing over 60% of flash based MP3 player world market share in 2004. In 2005, peak iPod first-generation Shuffle production occurred at a hundred thousand units per day, at the
  
   Asus
  
  factory.
 
  It lacked a
  
   display
  
  , the trademark
  
   scroll wheel
  
  ,
  
   playlist
  
  management features, and the games, address book, calendar, alarm, and notes capability of larger iPods; nor could it be used with
  
   iSync
  
  . Due to the codec not being ported, it was incapable of playing
  
   Apple Lossless
  
  and
  
   AIFF
  
  audio files.
 
  Due to superior audio technology in the SigmaTel STMP35xx SOC and SDK, the first generation had a better
  
   bass
  
  response than
  
   a 4th generation iPod
  
  , according to a review published days after its release.
  

    [2]
   



    [3]
   


  iTunes offered some new features for iPod Shuffle. One was the ability to reduce the
  
   bit rate
  
  of songs to 128 kbit/s
  
   AAC
  
  . The conversion is done automatically, with the original
  
   file
  
  left untouched on the computer and the smaller (lower bit rate) file sent to the iPod Shuffle. Older versions of iTunes allowed an iPod Shuffle playlist to be viewed and changed while the unit is not connected; the next time the unit is connected, it can then be updated with the changed playlist. However, this functionality is no longer a part of iTunes as of iTunes 7.
 
  The front of the iPod Shuffle had buttons for Play/Pause, Next Song/Fast Forward, Previous Song/Fast Reverse, and up and down
  
   volume
  
  adjustment. On the reverse, it had a
  
   battery
  
  level indicator light (activated by a button) and a three-position switch to turn the unit off or set it to play music in order or shuffled. It plugged directly into a computer's
  
   USB
  
  port (either 1.1 or 2.0), through which it also recharged its battery, which has an expected life of around 12 hours. The USB plug is hidden beneath a cap. The unit also comes with a lanyard that attaches to the iPod Shuffle via an attached cap and this allows the user to wear the iPod Shuffle around his or her neck.
 
  The first generation could also be used as a
  
   USB flash drive
  
  . iTunes allowed users to set how much of the drive would be allowed for storing files, and how much would be used for storing music.
 
  On September 12, 2006, Apple announced the release of the second generation iPod Shuffle, calling it "the most wearable iPod ever".
  

    [4]
   

  First shipments of the unit were slated for an October 2006 arrival, but actually started shipping on Friday, November 3, 2006.
  

    [5]
   

  The second generation initially featured a lone 1
  
   GB
  
  model in a silver brushed aluminum case, similar to the second generation iPod Nano and the older
  
   iPod Mini
  
  . The new model was less than half the size of the first generation model at 41.2 x 27.3 x 10.5 mm (1.62 x 1.07 x 0.41 in), and was the size of the iPod Radio Remote. Apple claimed it was the "world's smallest MP3 player". This generation included the new built-in belt clip, and the actual unit itself was thinner, with the entire device weighing only 15.5
  
   g
  
  (0.55 ounces). The power/shuffle/no shuffle switch from the first generation version was separated into two controls to avoid an accidentally selected mode of operation. The formatting of the iPod itself was new to Apple, as the 2nd generation Shuffle only formatted itself to
  
   FAT32
  
  .
 
  On the second generation iPod Shuffle,
  
   USB
  
  connectivity is provided via an included piece of hardware which acts as a
  
   docking station
  
  for the transfer of data and the recharging of the iPod's internal battery through its
  
   headphone jack
  
  . The second generation iPod Shuffle was also able to act as a flash drive, just like the first generation iPod Shuffle. However, unlike the first generation iPod Shuffle, the second generation did not have a built-in USB connector. This means that the
  
   docking station
  
  was required for connection to a computer.
 
  The second generation Shuffle could play MP3, MP3
  
   VBR
  
  ,
  
   AAC
  
  ,
  
   Protected AAC
  
  , Audible (formats 2, 3 and 4),
  
   WAV
  
  and
  
   AIFF
  
  . Due to its low processing power the only iTunes-supported file format that the iPod did not support is
  
   Apple Lossless
  
  .
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  On January 30, 2007, Apple announced the addition of four new colors to the iPod Shuffle line - pink, orange, green, and blue, in addition to the original silver color. The orange color was a first for the iPod franchise. They also now came with new redesigned headphones that were not included with the original silver model. The box was also changed to have gray text instead of the lime-green text. On September 5, 2007, Apple introduced four new colors, including a
  
   Product Red
  
  version. The new colors were turquoise, lavender, mint green, and
  
   Product Red
  
  , with the previous colors discontinued. On February 19, 2008, Apple introduced a 2 GB version of the iPod Shuffle, retailing for US$69 and available in all the same colours as the 1 GB model. At the Apple Let's Rock Event on September 9, 2008, Apple once again released four new colors for the iPod Shuffle: blue, green, pink, and red, replacing the colors that were released in September 2007. The new blue, green and pink variants of the iPod Shuffle reverted to shades that were similar to the colors that were released in January 2007.
  

    [6]
   

  In June 2009,
  
   Avon
  
  offered a gold iPod Shuffle (second generation) for $29 when purchased in conjunction with two ANEW skin care products.
  

    [7]
   


  The second generation 2 GB iPod Shuffle was discontinued on March 11, 2009 and the 1 GB version was discontinued on September 9, 2009.
 
  The third generation iPod Shuffle was released on March 11, 2009 and was said by Apple to be "jaw-droppingly small" and "The first music player that talks to you".
  

    [8]
   

  with dimensions of 45.2 mm × 17.5 mm × 7.8 mm (1.8 in × 0.7 in × 0.3 in). It was available with a silver or black brushed aluminum case similar to the second generation iPod Shuffle; this made it the first iPod Shuffle that was available in black. It featured
  
   VoiceOver
  
  technology that allowed song names, artist names, album names and playlist contents and names to be spoken in 20 different languages
  

    [9]
   

  using the Text-to-Speech incorporated in
  
   iTunes
  
  8 and 9. It also gained support for multiple playlists, in contrast to previous versions of the iPod Shuffle, which allowed only a single playlist.
 
  The third generation iPod Shuffle featured a polished steel attachment clip, adopting for the first time the polished steel finishing previously found only on the larger iPods, rather than the brushed aluminum used in the second-generation iPod Shuffle. It also no longer had volume or track controls on the device itself. Instead, the packaged
  
   iPod earbuds
  
  included a three-button device on the right earbud cord. This added the functions of changing between playlists, hearing the song title and artist of the track playing, as well as play/pause, track changes and volume control.
  

    [10]
   

  It originally was not possible to change songs or volume with most third-party headphones, since they lacked these controls. However, since the device began playing music automatically when it was turned on, third-party headphones could still be used in "autoplay" mode (with no volume or playback controls), and after its release, some third-party headphones and headphone adapters began to include full support for the third generation.
  

    [11]
   

  The official headphones contained a chip designed by Apple to control the device.
  
   DRM
  
  is not however present in the chip as there is no encryption used.
  

    [12]
   


  According to the compatibility list published in Apple's website,
  

    [13]
   

  none of the currently sold Apple headphones support the iPod shuffle 3rd generation.
 
  On September 9, 2009, Apple introduced three new colors for the iPod Shuffle: pink, blue, and green. The
  
   Apple Store
  
  also offered a 4 GB model made of polished
  
   stainless steel
  
  .
  

    [14]
   


  On September 1, 2010 the fourth generation was released as part of the new iPod lineup. The fourth generation features the return of clickable track and volume controls from the first two generations. The control pad is 18% larger than the second generation of iPod Shuffle, and the dimensions of the device are 29 mm × 31.6 mm × 8.7 mm (1.1 in × 1.2 in × 0.3 in) and it weighs 12.5 g (0.4 oz).
 
  The model also features
  
   VoiceOver
  
  from the third generation, now with a devoted physical button, in twenty-nine languages (Chinese, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English, Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Polish, Portuguese, Romanian, Russian, Slovak, Spanish, Swedish, Thai, and Turkish). It also features
  
   Genius
  
  , and can handle multiple playlists. Like the previous generation it supports MP3,
  
   VBR
  
  ,
  
   AAC
  
  ,
  
   Protected AAC
  
  , Audible (formats 2, 3 and 4),
  
   WAV
  
  ,
  
   AIFF
  
  and
  
   Apple Lossless
  
  , and its battery lasts for 15 hours of music, according to Apple.
 
  It was originally sold in five colors (silver with a black control pad, green, blue, orange and pink with a white control pad). However, on September 12, 2012, Apple held an event to formally introduce the iPhone 5, as well as a new iPod lineup, and the iPod Shuffle remained unchanged except for seven new color options (silver or black with a black control pad or green, blue, pink, yellow, and purple with a white control pad), as well as a
  
   Product Red
  
  edition model with a white control pad. Unlike the second Generation, the iPod does not come with a dock, but like the third generation, comes with a 45 mm USB Cable. The included in-box headphones do not feature the remote control, but the device supports them.
 
  On September 10, 2013, to coincide with the release of the
  
   iPhone 5S
  
  , the "Slate" color option was replaced with "Space Grey".
 
  On July 15, 2015, Apple released 6 new colors (blue, pink, silver, gold, space grey, and Product Red) for the iPod Shuffle.
 
  The iPod Shuffle was announced at the same time as the
  
   Mac Mini
  
  . Like the iPod Shuffle, the Mac Mini is a scaled-down
  
   product
  
  which has been introduced at a lower price. These two products together can be seen as a conscious effort on the part of Apple management to target a
  
   lower-end market
  
  and increase visibility in the
  
   mass-market
  
  . Previously, the success of Apple's
  
   iPod
  
  and especially the
  
   iPod Mini
  
  had been chipping away at the inexpensive flash player market, causing flash players at the beginning of 2005 to account for less than half the market share they did in 2004.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  However, the original and Mini iPods were expensive and the Shuffle was intended to make the iPod compete with mainstream players.
 
  By April 2005, the end of Apple's second fiscal quarter, the iPod Shuffle had already proven itself to be a successful product for its manufacturer. Although Apple has chosen not to specify how many iPod Shuffles were sold in the product's first three months of existence, analysts at
  
   Piper Jaffray
  
  estimated that 1.8 million of the 5.3 million iPods sold in the second quarter were Shuffles.
  
   NPD Group
  
  estimates that the iPod Shuffle captured 43% of the flash-based music player market in February 2005, after only its second month of existence.
  

    [15]
   

  By March 2005 the iPod Shuffle's market share had risen to 58%.
  

    [16]
   


  In September 2006, Apple CEO
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  announced during his keynote presentation on the "It's Showtime" Special Event, that until then, Apple had sold 10 million first generation iPod Shuffles.
 


    PC World
   

  reported a problem with the first-generation iPod Shuffles ceasing normal function, only to flash orange and green lights and become unmountable. Since the Shuffle has no display, the owner cannot read an error message or troubleshoot easily, requiring diagnosis by Apple service personnel. Flashing green and orange lights on the iPod Shuffle indicate that a generic "error" has occurred, according to Apple's documentation.
  

    [17]
   

  If the device is still covered by warranty, Apple will replace it for free.
  

    [18]
   

  This problem has also occurred on second generation iPod Shuffles.
 
  On October 26, 2006, Apple released an iPod Shuffle Reset Utility that corrected this problem for some owners of first-generation iPod Shuffles.
  

    [19]
   

  Then, in March 2007, an updated iPod Reset Utility was released which can also address similar problems with second-generation iPod Shuffles.
  

    [20]
   


  Unlike most other portable audio players, the third generation iPod Shuffle's controls are situated on the packaged headphones. The user is unable to control the device unless they use either Apple headphones designed for it, or third-party headphones or adapters that must be licensed by Apple. The third generation iPod Shuffle's headphones contain a proprietary
  
   integrated circuit
  
  .
  

    [21]
   

  Also, inline control adapters that were made by third-party companies for use with the iPhone and iPod are incompatible with the iPod Shuffle.
  

    [22]
   


  Several months after the third generation release, several third-party companies, including Belkin and Scosche, released adaptors which can be used to add the controls to standard headphones.
  

    [23]
   

