


   Windows Mobile
  
  is a family of
  
   mobile operating systems
  
  developed by
  
   Microsoft
  
  for
  
   smartphones
  
  and
  
   Pocket PCs
  
  .
  

    [2]
   


  Its origins dated back to
  
   Windows CE
  
  in 1996, though Windows Mobile itself first appeared in 2000 as
  
   PocketPC 2000
  
  . It was renamed "Windows Mobile" in 2003, at which point it came in several versions (similar to the desktop versions of Windows) and was aimed at business and enterprise consumers. By 2007, it was the most popular smartphone software in the U.S., but this popularity faded in the following years. In February 2010, facing competition from rival OSs including
  
   iOS
  
  and
  
   Android
  
  , Microsoft announced
  
   Windows Phone
  
  to supersede Windows Mobile. As a result, Windows Mobile has been
  
   deprecated
  
  . Windows Phone is incompatible with Windows Mobile devices and software.
  

    [3]
   



    [4]
   



    [5]
   

  The last version of Windows Mobile, released after the announcement of Windows Phone, was 6.5.5. After this, Microsoft ceased development on Windows Mobile, in order to concentrate on Windows Phone.
 


  Most versions of Windows Mobile have a standard set of features, such as
  
   multitasking
  
  and the ability to navigate a file system similar to that of
  
   Windows 9x
  
  and
  
   Windows NT
  
  , including support for many of the same file types. Similarly to its
  
   desktop counterpart
  
  , it comes bundled with a set of applications that perform basic tasks.
  
   Internet Explorer Mobile
  
  is the default
  
   web browser
  
  , and
  
   Windows Media Player
  
  is the default
  
   media player
  
  used for playing
  
   digital media
  
  . The mobile version of
  
   Microsoft Office
  
  , is the default
  
   office suite
  
  .
 

   Internet Connection Sharing
  
  , supported on compatible devices, allows the phone to share its Internet connection with computers via USB and Bluetooth. Windows Mobile supports
  
   virtual private networking
  
  over
  
   PPTP
  
  protocol. Most devices with mobile connectivity also have a
  
   Radio Interface Layer
  
  . The Radio Interface Layer provides the system interface between the Cell Core layer within the Windows Mobile OS and the radio protocol stack used by the wireless modem hardware. This allows OEMs to integrate a variety of modems into their equipment.
 
  The user interface changed dramatically between versions, only retaining similar functionality. The
  
   Today Screen
  
  , later called the
  
   Home Screen
  
  , shows the current
  
   date
  
  , owner information, upcoming appointments, e-mails, and
  
   tasks
  
  . The taskbar display the current time as well as the volume level. Devices with a cellular radio also show the signal strength on said taskbar.
 
  Windows Mobile is based on the
  
   Windows CE
  

   kernel
  
  and first appeared as the
  
   Pocket PC 2000
  
  operating system. It includes a suite of basic applications developed with the Microsoft
  
   Windows
  

   API
  
  , and is designed to have features and appearance somewhat similar to
  
   desktop
  
  versions of
  
   Windows
  
  . It allowed
  
   third party developers
  
  to
  
   develop software
  
  for Windows Mobile with no restrictions imposed by Microsoft. Software applications were purchasable from
  
   Windows Marketplace for Mobile
  
  during the service's lifespan.
 
  Most early Windows Mobile devices came with a
  
   stylus
  
  , which can be used to enter commands by tapping it on the screen.
  

    [6]
   

  The primary touch input technology behind most devices were
  
   resistive touchscreens
  
  which often required a stylus for input. Later devices used
  
   capacitive sensing
  
  which does not require a stylus. Along with touchscreens, a large variety of
  
   form factors
  
  existed for the platform. Some devices featured slideout keyboards, while others featured minimal face buttons.
 
  Microsoft's work on handheld portable devices began with research projects in 1990, with the work on Windows CE beginning in 1992.
  

    [7]
   

  Initially, the OS and the user interface were developed separately. With Windows CE being based on Windows 95 code and a separate team handing the user interface which was codenamed WinPad (later Microsoft At Work for Handhelds).
  

    [7]
   

  Windows 95 had strong pen support making porting easy; with some saying "At this time, Windows 95 offers outstanding pen support. It is treating pens right for the first time."
  

    [8]
   

  WinPad was delayed due to price and performance issues,
  

    [9]
   

  before being scrapped in early 1995 due to touchscreen driver problems relating to WriteTouch technology, made by NCR Microelectronic Products.
  

    [8]
   

  Although WinPad was never released as a consumer product, Alpha builds were released showcasing many interface elements.
  

    [10]
   

  During development of WinPad a separate team worked on a project called Pulsar; designed to be a mobile communications version of WinPad, described as a "pager on Steroids".
  

    [7]
   

  This project was also canceled around the same time as WinPad. The two disbanded groups would form the Pegasus project in 1995. Pegasus would work on the hardware side of the Windows CE OS, attempting to create a form factor similar to a PC-esque PDA like WinPad, with communications functionality like Pulsar. A hardware reference guide was created and devices began shipping in 1996, although most of these device bore little resemblance to the goal of a pen-based touchscreen handheld device.
  

    [11]
   


  Pocket PC 2000, originally codenamed "Rapier",
  

    [12]
   

  was released on April 19, 2000, and was based on the
  
   Windows CE
  
  3.0 kernel.
 
  It was the debut of what was later dubbed the Windows Mobile operating system, and meant to be a successor to the operating system aboard
  
   Palm-size PCs
  
  . It retained backwards compatibility with such Palm-Size PC applications. Pocket PC 2000 was intended mainly for
  
   Pocket PC
  
  devices; however, several Palm-Size PC devices had the ability to be updated also. While, several Pocket PC 2000 phones were released, Microsoft's smartphone hardware platform was not yet created. The only resolution supported by this release was 240 x 320 (
  
   QVGA
  
  ). Removable storage card formats that were supported were
  
   CompactFlash
  
  and
  
   MultiMediaCard
  
  . At this time Pocket PC devices had not been standardized with a specific CPU architecture. As a result, Pocket PC 2000 was released on multiple CPU architectures;
  
   SH-3
  
  ,
  
   MIPS
  
  , and
  
   ARM
  
  .
  
   Infrared
  
  (IR) File beaming capability was among the original hardware features.
 
  The original Pocket PC operating system had similar appearance to
  
   Windows 98
  
  ,
  
   Windows Me
  
  , and
  
   Windows 2000
  
  operating systems. Pocket PC 2000 is unsupported as of September 10, 2007.
 
  This initial release had multiple built-in applications,
  

    [13]
   

  many of them similarly branded to match their desktop counterparts; such as
  
   Microsoft Reader
  
  ,
  
   Microsoft Money
  
  ,
  
   Pocket Internet Explorer
  
  and
  
   Windows Media Player
  
  . A version of
  
   Microsoft Office
  
  called
  
   Pocket Office
  
  was also bundled and included Pocket Word, Pocket Excel and Pocket Outlook. Notes, a note-taking app saw its first release and would be supported by most later versions of Windows Mobile.
  
   Intelligent character recognition
  
  support allowed Notes to distinguish styles of handwriting to be learned by the OS during processing to improve accuracy and recognition levels.
 
  Pocket PC 2002, originally codenamed "Merlin",
  

    [12]
   

  was released in October 2001, and like Pocket PC 2000, was based on the
  
   Windows CE
  
  3.0 kernel.
 
  Although targeted mainly for 240 × 320 (
  
   QVGA
  
  )
  
   Pocket PC
  
  devices, Pocket PC 2002 was also used for Pocket PC phones, and for the first time,
  
   Smartphones
  
  .
  

    [14]
   

  These Pocket PC 2002 Smartphones were mainly
  
   GSM
  
  devices. With future releases, the Pocket PC and Smartphone lines would increasingly collide as the licensing terms were relaxed allowing OEMs to take advantage of more innovative, individual design ideas. Aesthetically, Pocket PC 2002 was meant to be similar in design to the then newly released
  
   Windows XP
  
  . Newly added or updated programs include
  

    [15]
   



    [16]
   



    [17]
   



    [18]
   


   Windows Media Player
  
  8 with
  
   streaming
  
  capability;
  
   MSN Messenger
  
  , and
  
   Microsoft Reader
  
  2, with
  
   Digital rights management
  
  support. Upgrades to the bundled version of Office Mobile include a
  
   spell checker
  
  and
  
   word count
  
  tool in
  
   Pocket Word
  
  and improved
  
   Pocket Outlook
  
  . Connectivity was improved with file beaming on non-Microsoft devices such as
  
   Palm OS
  
  , the inclusion of
  
   Terminal Services
  
  and
  
   Virtual private networking
  
  support, and the ability to synchronize folders. Other upgrades include an enhanced
  
   UI
  
  with theme support and savable downloads and
  
   WAP
  
  in
  
   Pocket Internet Explorer
  
  .
 
  Windows Mobile 2003, originally codenamed "Ozone",
  

    [12]
   

  was released on June 23, 2003, was based on the
  
   Windows CE
  
  4.x kernel, and was the first release under the Windows Mobile banner.
 
  It came in four editions: "Windows Mobile 2003 for
  
   Pocket PC
  
  Premium Edition", "Windows Mobile 2003 for Pocket PC Professional Edition", "Windows Mobile 2003 for
  
   Smartphone
  
  " and "Windows Mobile 2003 for Pocket PC Phone Edition". The last was designed especially for Pocket PCs which include phone functionalities. The Professional Edition was used in Pocket PC budget models. It lacked a number of features that were in the Premium Edition, such as a client for
  
   L2TP/IPsec
  
  VPNs. Windows Mobile 2003 was powered by Windows CE 4.20.
 
  Communications interface were enhanced with
  
   Bluetooth
  
  device management. Which allowed for Bluetooth file beaming support, Bluetooth headset support and support for Bluetooth add-on keyboards. A pictures application with viewing, cropping, e-mail, and beaming support was added. Multimedia improvements included
  
   MIDI
  
  file support as ringtones in Phone Edition and
  
   Windows Media Player
  
  9.0 with streaming optimization. A puzzle game titled
  

    Jawbreaker
   

  is among the preinstalled programs. GAPI was included with this release to facilitate the development of games for the platform.
  

    [19]
   


  Other features/built-in applications included the following:
  

    [20]
   

  enhanced
  
   Pocket Outlook
  
  with
  
   vCard
  
  and
  
   vCal
  
  support, improved
  
   Pocket Internet Explorer
  
  and
  
   SMS
  
  reply options for Phone Edition.
 
  Windows Mobile 2003 Second Edition, also known as "Windows Mobile 2003 SE", was released on March 24, 2004, was based on the
  
   Windows CE
  
  4.x kernel, and first offered on the
  
   Dell
  

   Axim x30
  
  . This was the last version which allowed users to back up and restore an entire device through
  
   ActiveSync
  
  .
 
  This upgrade allows users to switch between
  
   portrait
  
  and
  
   landscape
  
  modes and introduces a single-column layout in
  
   Pocket Internet Explorer
  
  . It includes support for
  
   Wi-Fi Protected Access
  
  (WPA) and new
  
   screen resolutions
  
  : 640×480 (
  
   VGA
  
  ), 240x240, and 480x480.
 
  Windows Mobile 5.0, originally codenamed "Magneto",
  

    [12]
   

  was released at Microsoft's Mobile and Embedded Developers Conference 2005 in Las Vegas, May 9–12, 2005, and was based on the
  
   Windows CE
  
  5.0 kernel.
 
  Microsoft offered mainstream support for Windows Mobile 5 through October 12, 2010, and extended support through October 13, 2015.
  

    [21]
   

  It was first offered on the
  
   Dell Axim
  
  x51. It used the
  
   .NET Compact Framework
  
  1.0 SP3, an environment for programs based on .NET. Windows Mobile 5.0 included
  
   Microsoft Exchange Server
  
  "push" functionality improvements that worked with Exchange 2003 SP2.
  

    [22]
   

  The "push" functionality also required vendor/device support
  

    [23]
   

  With
  
   AKU2
  
  software upgrades all WM 5.0 devices supported
  
   DirectPush
  
  .
 
  Other features included an enhanced battery-saving capability called
  
   persistent storage
  
  capability. Previously up to 50% (enough for 72 hours of storage) of battery power was reserved just to maintain data in volatile RAM. This continued the trend of Windows-based devices moving from using RAM as their primary storage medium to the use of a combination of RAM and flash memory (in use, no distinction between the two is obvious to users). Programs and frequently accessed data run in RAM, while most storage is in the flash memory. The OS seamlessly moves data between the two as needed. Everything is backed up in the flash memory, so unlike prior devices, WM5 devices lose no data if power is lost. New to 5.0, OS updates were released as
  
   Adaptation kit upgrades
  
  , with AKU 3.5 being the final released.
 
  Windows Mobile 5 comes with
  
   Microsoft Office Mobile
  
  which includes PowerPoint Mobile, Excel Mobile with graphing capability and Word Mobile with the ability to insert tables and graphics. Media management and playback was enhanced with Picture and Video package, which converged the management of videos and pictures and
  
   Windows Media Player
  
  10 Mobile. Among new hardware features were enhanced
  
   Bluetooth
  
  support, default
  
   QWERTY
  
  keyboard-support and a management interface for
  
   Global Positioning System
  
  (GPS). Improvements were made to
  
   ActiveSync
  
  4.2 with 15% increased synchronization speed. Business customers benefited from a new error reporting facility similar to that present in desktop and server
  
   Windows
  
  systems.
  
   Caller ID
  
  now supports photos so a user can apply an image to each contact to show when a call is received.
  
   DirectShow
  
  was also natively added. This release was the first to include DirectDraw with hardware acceleration, replacing the deprecated graphics component of
  
   GAPI
  
  .
  

    [19]
   


  Windows Mobile 5.0 requires at least 64 MBs of ROM (it's advisable to have 64 MBs of RAM), and the device must run an ARM compatible processor such as the Intel
  
   XScale
  
  or the Samsung and Texas Instruments ARM compatibles.
  

    [24]
   


  Windows Mobile 6, formerly codenamed "Crossbow",
  

    [12]
   

  was released on February 12, 2007
  

    [25]
   

  at the
  
   3GSM World Congress 2007
  
  , and was based on the
  
   Windows CE
  
  5.2 kernel.
 
  It comes in three different versions: "Windows Mobile 6 Standard" for Smartphones (phones without touchscreens), "Windows Mobile 6 Professional" for Pocket PCs with phone functionality, and "Windows Mobile 6 Classic" for Pocket PCs without cellular radios.
  

    [26]
   


  Windows Mobile 6 is powered by
  
   Windows CE 5.0
  
  (version 5.2) and is strongly linked to the then newly introduced
  
   Windows Live
  


    [27]
   

  and
  
   Exchange 2007
  
  products. Windows Mobile 6 Standard was first offered on the
  
   Orange's SPV E650
  
  ,
  

    [28]
   

  while Windows Mobile 6 Professional was first offered on the O2's Xda Terra.
  

    [29]
   

  Aesthetically, Windows Mobile 6 was meant to be similar in design to the then newly released
  
   Windows Vista
  
  . Functionally, it works much like Windows Mobile 5, but with much better stability.
 
  Along with the announcement of
  
   Office Mobile
  
  6.1
  

    [30]
   

  with support for Office 2007 document formats (pptx, docx, xlsx); OneNote Mobile, a companion to
  
   Microsoft Office OneNote
  
  was added to the already installed version. In addition to the newly included programs with Office Mobile improvements were made to existing applications. Such as
  
   HTML email
  
  support in
  
   Outlook
  
  Mobile. A large number of Windows Mobile users are enterprise users business environments were targeted. With
  
   Server Search
  
  on Microsoft Exchange 2007, Out of Office Replies with Microsoft Exchange 2007, and search ability for contacts in an
  
   Exchange Server
  
  Address Book being implemented. To aid development for programmers,
  
   .NET Compact Framework
  
  v2 SP2 is now preinstalled with the OS. Developers and users also have access to
  
   Microsoft SQL Server 2005 Compact Edition
  
  for storage and retrieval of information.
  
   AJAX
  
  ,
  
   JavaScript
  
  , and
  
   XMLDOM
  
  support were added to
  
   Internet Explorer Mobile
  
  along with improved devicewide Internet Sharing. Communication abilities were further enhanced with a new Microsoft
  
   Bluetooth
  
  Stack and
  
   VoIP
  
  (Internet calling) support with AEC (
  
   Acoustic Echo Cancelling
  
  ) and
  
   MSRT
  
  Audio Codec.
 
  To improve security Microsoft added Storage Card Encryption so that encryption keys are lost if device is
  
   cold-booted
  
  . Further updates both, security and feature, can now also be provided using Operating System Live Update
  

    [31]
   


  Among other improvements:
  

    [32]
   

  320x320 and 800x480 (WVGA)
  
   screen resolution
  
  support (The S01SH or "Em One" by Sharp was the first and only device to have an 800x480 screen on WM5),
  

    [33]
   

  Improved
  
   Remote Desktop
  
  access
  

    [34]
   

  (Available for only certain Pocket PCs),
  

    [35]
   

  Customer Feedback option,
  

    [36]
   


   Smartfilter
  
  for searching within programs and
  
   Unlicensed Mobile Access
  
  (UMA) support for select operators
 
  Windows Mobile 6.1 was announced April 1, 2008, and was based on the
  
   Windows CE
  
  5.x kernel.
 
  It is a minor upgrade to the Windows Mobile 6 platform with various performance enhancements and a redesigned
  
   Home
  
  screen featuring horizontal
  
   tiles
  
  that expand on clicking to display more information, although this new home screen is featured only on Windows Mobile Standard edition. This was not supported in the Professional edition.
  

    [37]
   

  Several other changes such as
  
   threaded SMS
  
  , full page zooming in Internet Explorer and 'Domain Enroll' were also added, along with a "mobile" version of the
  
   Microsoft OneNote
  
  program and an interactive "Getting Started" wizard. Domain Enroll is functionality to connect the device to
  
   System Center Mobile Device Manager
  
  2008, a product to manage mobile devices.
  

    [38]
   

  Windows Mobile 6.1 also had improved bandwidth efficiency in its push-email protocol ActiveSync up to 40%;
  

    [39]
   

  this considerably improved battery life in many devices.
 
  Aside from the visual and feature distinctions, the underlying CE versions can be used to differentiate WM6.0 from WM 6.1. The version of Windows CE in WM 6.0 is 5.2.*, with the final number being a 4 digit build ID (e.g. 5.2.1622 on HTC Wing). In WM 6.1, the CE version is 5.2.* with a 5 digit build number (e.g. 5.2.19216 on Palm Treo 800w).
 
  Windows Mobile 6.5 was based on the
  
   Windows CE
  
  5.x kernel.
 
  Windows Mobile 6.5 was a stopgap update to Windows Mobile 6.1 intended to bridge the gap between version 6.1 and the then yet-to-be released Windows Mobile 7 (Later canceled in favor of Windows Phone 7), that arrived in 2010. It was never part of Microsoft's mobile phone roadmap, and has been described by its chief executive,
  
   Steve Ballmer
  
  , as "not the full release [Microsoft] wanted" until the
  
   multi-touch
  
  -enabled Windows Mobile 7 (now replaced by
  
   Windows Phone
  
  ) arrived in 2010.
  

    [40]
   

  Ballmer also indicated that the company "screwed up with Windows Mobile", he lamented that Windows Mobile 7 was not yet available and that the Windows Mobile team needed to try to recoup losses.
  

    [41]
   

  Microsoft unveiled this version at the 2009
  
   Mobile World Congress
  
  in February,
  

    [42]
   

  and several devices were supplied with it.
  

    [43]
   

  It was released to manufacturers on May 11, 2009; the first devices running the operating system appeared in late October 2009.
  

    [44]
   

  Several phones that officially shipped with Windows Mobile 6.1 can be officially updated to Windows Mobile 6.5.
  

    [45]
   

  This update includes some significant new added features, such as a revamped GUI, a new Today screen resembling that of Microsoft's
  
   Zune
  
  player with vertically scrollable labels (called 'Titanium').
  

    [46]
   

  WM6.5 also includes the new Internet Explorer Mobile 6 browser, with improved interface.
  

    [47]
   


  Along with Windows Mobile 6.5, Microsoft announced several
  
   Cloud computing
  
  services codenamed "SkyBox", "SkyLine", "SkyMarket".
  

    [48]
   

  "SkyBox" has been confirmed as
  
   My Phone
  
  ,
  

    [49]
   

  while "SkyMarket" has been confirmed as
  
   Windows Marketplace for Mobile
  
  .
  

    [50]
   

  This version was designed mainly for easier finger usage.
  

    [51]
   

  Some reviewers have noted interface inconsistencies, with some applications having small buttons making them harder to operate using only a finger.
  

    [52]
   

  Whilst this version of Windows Mobile does not natively support
  
   capacitive screens
  
  , mobile manufacturers have been able to use them on their devices
  

    [53]
   


  In the months following this release, development shifted from Windows Mobile to its successor Windows Phone. As such no major upgrades were planned or released, although three minor updates; 6.5.1, 6.5.3 and 6.5.5; were made to satisfy consumers during the transition period. 6.5.1 brings larger user interface elements,
  

    [54]
   

  including icon based soft buttons (rather than text based),
  

    [55]
   

  an updated contacts app,
  

    [56]
   

  native support for
  
   A-GPS
  
  ,
  

    [54]
   

  improved threaded text messaging,
  

    [57]
   

  and performance improvements.
  

    [58]
   

  It was unofficially ported to several Windows Mobile phones.
  

    [59]
   


  The second minor update was announced on February 2, 2010, along with the
  
   Sony Ericsson
  
  Aspen which was the first phone to use this version.
  

    [60]
   

  6.5.3 continues the trend of attempting to provide a more finger-friendly user interface with several new usability features such as native support for
  
   multitouch
  
  ; although device maker
  
   HTC Corporation
  
  created proprietary work-arounds to allow multi-touch to work on some applications it installed on its HD2 handset(However, Microsoft applications on this handset, such as the Internet Explorer web browser, did not support multi-touch.
  

    [61]
   

  ) and drag-and-drop start menu icons. Touchable tiles replaced soft keys."
  

    [62]
   

  Internet Explorer Mobile 6 has also received some major updates including decreased page load time, improved memory management and gesture smoothing.
  

    [63]
   

  As with other updates it was unofficially ported to some other devices. Additional features include threaded email and Office Mobile 2010.
  

    [64]
   


  The last minor update and the last released version is 6.5.5. It first leaked in January 2010, and was unofficially ported to some Windows Mobile phones.
  

    [65]
   

  The name Windows Mobile 6.5.5 has been applied to these newer builds, although this name remained unconfirmed by Microsoft.
 
  There are three main versions of Windows Mobile for various hardware devices:
  

    [66]
   


  Windows Mobile for Automotive and Windows Mobile software for Portable Media Centers are among some specialty versions of the platform.
 
  Microsoft had over 50 handset partners,
  

    [67]
   

  when Windows Mobile was still being shipped on new devices. 80% of the 50 million Windows Mobile devices that were made from launch to February 2009 were built by one contract manufacturing group,
  
   HTC
  
  , which makes handsets for several major companies under their brands, and under its own brand.
  

    [68]
   


  On January 10, 2011, Microsoft announced Windows Embedded Handheld 6.5. The operating system has compatibility with Windows Mobile 6.5 and is presented as an enterprise handheld device, targeting retailers, delivery companies, and other companies that rely on handheld computing. Unlike Windows Phone, Windows Embedded Handheld retains backward compatibility with legacy Windows Mobile applications.
  

    [69]
   



   Pocket PCs
  
  and
  
   personal digital assistants
  
  were originally the intended platform for Windows Mobile. These were grouped into two main categories: devices that lacked mobile phone capabilities, and those that included it. Beginning with version 6 devices with this functionality ran "Windows Mobile 6 Professional" and those that lacked it ran "Windows Mobile 6 Classic". Microsoft had described these devices as "a handheld device that enables you to store and retrieve e-mail, contacts, appointments, play multimedia files, games, exchange text messages with MSN Messenger, browse the Web, and more".
  

    [70]
   

  From a technical standpoint Microsoft also specified various hardware and software requirements such as the inclusion of a touchscreen and a directional pad or touchpad.
 
  Smartphones were the second hardware platform after Pocket PC to run Windows Mobile, and debuted with the release of Pocket PC 2002. Although in the broad sense of the term "Smartphone", both Pocket PC phones and Microsoft branded Smartphones each fit into this category, it should be noted that Microsoft's use of the term "Smartphone" includes only more specific hardware devices that differ from Pocket PC phones. Such Smartphones were originally designed without
  
   touchscreens
  
  , intended to be operated more efficiently with only one hand, and typically had lower
  
   display resolution
  
  than Pocket PCs. Microsoft's focus for the Smartphone platform was to create a device that functioned well as a phone and data device in a more integrated manner.
  

    [71]
   


  Windows Mobile's share of the
  
   smartphone
  
  market grew from its inception while new devices were being released. After peaking in 2007,
  

    [73]
   

  it saw decline year-on-year.
 
  In Q1 2004, Windows Mobile accounted for 23% of worldwide smartphone sales.
  

    [74]
   

  Windows Mobile was projected to overtake Symbian to become the leading mobile OS by 2010.
  

    [75]
   


  In Q4 2005 Microsoft shipped 2.2 million PDAs, which increased to 3.5 million in the same quarter the following year.
  

    [76]
   

  Windows Mobile saw year over year growth between 2005–2006 of 38.8% which according to Gartner "helped Windows Mobile to solidify its stronghold on the market".
  

    [76]
   


  But by 2008, its share had dropped to 14%.
  

    [77]
   

  Microsoft licensed Windows Mobile to four out of the world's five largest mobile phone manufacturers, with Nokia being the exception.
  

    [78]
   



   Gartner
  
  research data showed that while the total smartphone industry grew 27% between 2008 and 2009, Windows Mobile's share of the smartphone market fell 2.7% in that same period.
  

    [79]
   

  It also
  

    [79]
   

  decreased by 20% in Q3 2009.
  

    [80]
   

  At one time Windows Mobile was the most popular handset for business use,
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  but by 2009 this was no longer the case; 24% of planned business deployments of mobile application were for Windows Mobile, putting it in 3rd place, behind Blackberry (61%) and iPhone (27%);
  

    [81]
   


  In February 2009, Microsoft signed a deal with the third largest mobile phone maker,
  
   LG Electronics
  
  , to license Windows Mobile OS on 50 upcoming LG smartphone models.
  

    [82]
   

  But in September 2009,
  
   Palm, Inc.
  
  announced it would drop Windows Mobile from its smartphone line-up.
  

    [83]
   

  Gartner estimated that by the third quarter of 2009 Windows Mobile's share of worldwide smartphone sales was 7.9%.
  

    [80]
   

  By August 2010, it was the least popular smartphone operating system, with a 5% share of the worldwide smartphone market (after
  
   Symbian
  
  ,
  
   BlackBerry OS
  
  ,
  
   Android
  
  and
  
   iOS
  
  ).
  

    [84]
   

  An October 2009 report in
  

    DigiTimes
   

  said that
  
   Acer
  
  will shift its focus from Windows Mobile to
  
   Google Android
  
  .
  

    [85]
   


   The New York Times
  
  reported in 2009 that Windows Mobile "is foundering", as cellphone makers desert it in favor of Google's
  
   Android
  
  phone platform.
  

    [86]
   

  It cited the difficulties in Microsoft's business model, which involves charging handset manufacturers up to $25 for each copy of Windows Mobile, while rival Google gives away Android for free.
  

    [87]
   

  From late 2009 analysts and media reports began to express concerns about the future viability of the Windows Mobile platform, and whether Microsoft would keep supporting it into the future.
  

    [88]
   



    [89]
   



    [90]
   


   Samsung
  
  announced in November 2009 that it would phase out the Windows Mobile platform,
  

    [91]
   

  to concentrate on its own
  
   Bada
  
  operating system, Google's Android, and Microsoft's Windows Phone.
  

    [92]
   



   Software may be developed
  
  by third parties for the Windows Mobile
  
   operating system
  
  . Developers have several options for deploying mobile applications. These include writing native code with
  
   Visual C++
  
  ,
  
   managed code
  
  that works with the
  
   .NET Compact Framework
  
  , writing code in
  
   Tcl
  
  -Tk with eTcl,
  

    [93]
   

  GCC using
  
   CeGCC
  
  ,
  

    [94]
   


   Python
  
  using PythonCE or
  
   server-side code
  
  that can be deployed using
  
   Internet Explorer Mobile
  
  or a mobile client on a user's device. The .NET Compact Framework is a subset of the
  
   .NET Framework
  
  and hence shares many components with software development on desktop clients, application servers, and web servers which have the .NET Framework installed, thus integrating networked computing space.
  

    [95]
   


  To aid developers Microsoft released
  
   software development kits
  
  (SDKs) that work in conjunction with their
  
   Visual Studio
  
  development environment. These SDKs include
  
   emulator
  
  images for developers to test and
  
   debug
  
  their applications while writing them. Software can be tested on a client machine directly or be downloaded to a device. Microsoft also distributes Visual Studio 2008 / 2005 Professional Editions, and server / database counterparts to students as downloads free of charge via its
  
   DreamSpark
  
  program.
  

    [96]
   

  Third party
  
   integrated development environments
  
  can also be used to write software such as
  
   Lazarus
  
  ,
  
   Resco
  
  MobileForms Toolkit,
  

    [97]
   


   Lexico
  
  ,
  
   NS Basic
  
  and
  
   Basic4ppc
  
  . Some third party development environments allow coding to be done on the device itself without the need for a computer.
  

    [98]
   


  Developer communities have used the SDK to port later versions of Windows Mobile OS to older devices and making the OS images available for free, thus providing the devices with the current feature set. Microsoft has tolerated this procedure for some time but decided in February 2007 to ask developers to take their OS images off the net, which in turn raised discussions.
  

    [99]
   

  At the same time Microsoft offered upgrades to Windows Mobile 6 versions to manufacturers for free.
  

    [100]
   


  On July 5, 2009, Microsoft opened a third-party application distribution service called
  
   Windows Marketplace for Mobile
  
  .
  

    [101]
   

  In 2011, Windows Marketplace for Mobile stopped accepting new admissions.
  

    [102]
   

  and then fully closed on May 9, 2012.
  

    [3]
   


  In the early years of Windows Mobile devices were able to be managed and synced from a remote computer using
  
   ActiveSync
  
  ; a
  
   data synchronization
  
  technology and
  
   protocol
  
  developed by
  
   Microsoft
  
  , originally released in 1996. This allowed servers running
  
   Microsoft Exchange Server
  
  , or other third party variants, to act as a
  
   personal information manager
  
  and share information such as email, calendar appointments, contacts or internet favorites.
 
  With the release of
  
   Windows Vista
  
  , ActiveSync was replaced with
  
   Windows Mobile Device Center
  
  . Device Center is included with Vista and
  
   Windows 7
  
  and provides many
  
   front end
  
  enhancements, allowing a home user to sync PIM information with Microsoft Outlook 2003 and later, photos from Windows Photo Gallery, videos or music from Windows Media Player and favorites with Internet Explorer; without the need for a server
  
   back end
  
  . Devices at this time also included a base driver compatible with Mobile Device Center so a user can connect to a computer without a need for any configuration.
 