


      Quad-band
     

      GSM
     
     /
     
      GPRS
     
     /
     
      EDGE
     

     (
     
      850, 900, 1800, 1900
     

      MHz
     
     )
     

      Wi-Fi
     
     (
     
      802.11
     

      b
     
     /
     
      g
     
     )
     

      Bluetooth 2.0
     


      USB 2.0
     
     /
     
      Dock connector
     


       [8]
      


  The
  
   iPhone
  
  (unofficially referred as the
  
   iPhone 2G
  

   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  ), is the first smartphone model designed and marketed by Apple. It is the
  
   first generation
  
  of
  
   iPhone
  
  that was announced on January 9, 2007 after years of rumors and speculation.
  

    [9]
   


  It was introduced in the United States on June 29, 2007, and it featured
  
   quad-band
  

   GSM
  
  cellular connectivity with
  
   GPRS
  
  and
  
   EDGE
  
  support for data transfer.
 
  On June 9, 2008, Apple announced its successor, the
  
   iPhone 3G
  
  . The original iPhone has not received software updates from Apple since iPhone OS (now iOS)
  
   3.1.3
  
  .
 
  Since June 11, 2013, the original iPhone has been considered "obsolete" in Apple retail stores, "vintage" by other service providers in the US, and "obsolete" in all other regions.
  

    [10]
   

  Apple does not service vintage or obsolete products, and replacement parts for obsolete products are not available to service providers.
 


  In 2005, Apple CEO
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  conceived an idea of using a
  
   multi-touch
  

   touchscreen
  
  to interact with a computer in a way in which he could type directly onto the display, essentially removing the physical
  
   keyboard
  
  and
  
   mouse
  
  , the same as a
  
   tablet computer
  
  . Jobs recruited a group of Apple engineers to investigate the idea as a side project.
  

    [11]
   

  When Jobs reviewed the prototype and its
  
   user interface
  
  , he conceived a second idea of implementing the technology onto a mobile phone.
  

    [12]
   

  The whole effort was called Project Purple 2 and began in 2005.
  

    [13]
   


  Apple created the device during a secretive and unprecedented collaboration with
  
   AT&T
  
  , formerly
  
   Cingular Wireless
  
  . The development cost of the collaboration was estimated to have been $150 million
  

    [14]
   

  over a thirty-month period. Apple rejected the "
  
   design by committee
  
  " approach that had yielded the
  
   Motorola ROKR E1
  
  , a largely unsuccessful collaboration with
  
   Motorola
  
  . Instead, Cingular Wireless gave Apple the liberty to develop the iPhone's hardware and software
  
   in-house
  
  .
  

    [15]
   



    [16]
   


  The original iPhone was introduced by Steve Jobs on January 9, 2007 in a
  
   keynote address
  
  at the
  
   Macworld Conference & Expo
  
  held in
  
   Moscone West
  
  in San Francisco, California.
  

    [17]
   

  In his address, Jobs said, "I have been looking forward to this for two and a half years", and that "today, Apple is going to reinvent the phone."
  

    [18]
   

  Jobs introduced the iPhone as a combination of three devices: a "widescreen iPod with touch controls"; a "revolutionary mobile phone"; and a "breakthrough Internet communicator".
  

    [19]
   


  The iPhone was released on June 29, 2007 in the United States where thousands of people were reported to have waited outside
  
   Apple
  
  and
  
   AT&T
  
  retail stores days before the device's launch;
  

    [20]
   

  with many stores reporting stock shortages within an hour. To avoid repeating the problems of the
  
   PlayStation 3 launch
  
  , which caused
  
   burglaries
  
  and even a shooting, off-duty police officers were hired to guard stores overnight.
  

    [21]
   


  It was later made available in the
  
   United Kingdom
  
  ,
  
   France
  
  ,
  
   Germany
  
  ,
  
   Portugal
  
  , the
  
   Republic of Ireland
  
  and
  
   Austria
  
  in November 2007.
 
  Six out of ten Americans surveyed said they knew the iPhone was coming before its release.
  

    [22]
   


  The
  
   iPod Touch
  
  , a touchscreen device with the media and internet abilities and interface of the iPhone, but without the ability to connect to a cellular network for phone functions or internet access, was released on September 5, 2007. At the same time, Apple significantly dropped the price of the 8 GB model (from $599 to $399, still requiring a 2-year contract with AT&T) while discontinuing the 4 GB model.
  

    [23]
   

  Apple sold the one millionth iPhone five days later, or 74 days after the release.
  

    [24]
   

  After receiving "hundreds of emails...upset" about the price drop, Apple gave store credit to early adopters.
  

    [25]
   


  A 16 GB model was released on February 5, 2008.
  

    [26]
   

  Apple released an
  
   SDK
  
  on March 6, 2008, allowing developers to create the apps that would be available starting in iPhone OS
  
   version 2.0
  
  , a free upgrade for iPhone users. On June 9, Apple announced the
  
   iPhone 3G
  
  , which began shipping July 11.
  

    [27]
   

  The original iPhone was discontinued 4 days later; total sales volume came to 6,124,000 units.
 
  While most Apple literature simply called the device "iPhone," the term "the original iPhone" appears in a press release from July 2010.
  

    [28]
   


  During release, the iPhone was marketed as running "OS X". The name of the operating system was revealed as iPhone OS with the release of the
  
   iPhone SDK
  
  . The original iPhone supported three major versions of the operating system before it was discontinued: iPhone OS 1, 2, and 3. However, the full iPhone OS 3 feature set was not supported, and the last update the original iPhone received was iPhone OS 3.1.3.
 
  The original operating system for the original iPhone was
  
   iPhone OS 1
  
  , marketed as OS X, and included Visual Voicemail, multi-touch gestures, HTML email, Safari web browser, threaded text messaging, and
  
   YouTube
  
  . However, many features like MMS, apps, and
  
   copy and paste
  
  were not supported at release, leading hackers
  
   jailbreaking
  
  their phones to add these features. Official software updates slowly added these features.
 

   iPhone OS 2
  
  was released on July 11, 2008, around the same time as the release of the
  
   iPhone 3G
  
  , and introduced third-party applications, Microsoft Exchange support, push e-mail, and other enhancements.
 

   iPhone OS 3
  
  was released on June 17, 2009, and introduced copy and paste functionality,
  
   Spotlight search
  
  for the
  
   home screen
  
  , and new features for the YouTube app. iPhone OS 3 was available for the original iPhone as well as the iPhone 3G. However, not all features of iPhone OS 3 were supported on the original iPhone.
 
  iPhone OS 3.1.3 was the last version of iPhone OS (now iOS) to be released for the original iPhone.
 


    The New York Times
   

  and
  

    The Wall Street Journal
   

  published positive, but cautious, reviews of the iPhone, their primary criticisms being the relatively slow speed of the
  
   AT&T
  
  's 2.5G
  
   EDGE
  
  network and the phone's inability to connect using
  
   3G
  
  services.
  
   The Wall Street Journal's
  
  technology columnist,
  
   Walt Mossberg
  
  , concluded that "despite some flaws and feature omissions, the iPhone is, on balance, a beautiful and breakthrough handheld computer."
  

    [29]
   



    Time
   

  magazine named it the Invention of the Year in 2007.
  

    [30]
   



