


   NTT DoCoMo
  
  's
  
   i-mode
  
  is a
  
   mobile internet
  
  (as opposed to
  
   wireless internet
  
  ) service popular in
  
   Japan
  
  . Unlike
  
   Wireless Application Protocol
  
  , i-mode encompasses a wider variety of internet standards, including web access,
  
   e-mail
  
  , and the
  
   packet-switched network
  
  that delivers the data. i-mode users have access to various services such as e-mail, sports results, weather forecast,
  
   games
  
  , financial services, and ticket booking. Content is provided by specialized services, typically from the
  
   mobile carrier
  
  , which allows them to have tighter control over billing.
 
  Like WAP, i-mode delivers only those services that are specifically converted for the service, or are converted through gateways. This has placed both systems at a disadvantage against handsets that use "real" browser software, and generally use a flat pricing structure for data.
 


  In contrast with the
  
   Wireless Application Protocol
  
  (WAP) standard, which used
  
   Wireless Markup Language
  
  (WML) on top of a protocol stack for wireless handheld devices, i-mode borrows from fixed Internet data formats such as
  
   C-HTML
  
  based on
  
   HTML
  
  , as well as DoCoMo proprietary protocols ALP (
  
   HTTP
  
  ) and TLP (
  
   TCP
  
  ,
  
   UDP
  
  ).
 
  i-mode phones have a special i-mode button for the user to access the start menu. There are more than 12,000 official sites and around 100,000 or more unofficial i-mode sites, which are not linked to DoCoMo's i-mode portal page and DoCoMo's billing services. NTT DoCoMo supervises the content and operations of all official i-mode sites, most of which are commercial. These official sites are accessed through DoCoMo's i-mode menu but in many cases official sites can also be accessed from mobile phones by typing the URL or through the use of
  
   QR code
  
  (a
  
   barcode
  
  ).
 
  An i-mode user pays for both sent and received data. There are services to avoid
  
   unsolicited e-mails
  
  . The basic monthly charge is typically on the order of
  
   JPY
  
  ¥200 - ¥300 for i-mode not including the data transfer charges, with additional charges on a monthly subscription basis for premium services. A variety of discount plans exist, for example family discount and flat packet plans for unlimited transfer of data at a fixed monthly charge (on the order of ¥4,000/month).
 
  i-mode was launched in Japan on 22 February 1999. The content planning and service design team was led by Mari Matsunaga, while Takeshi Natsuno was responsible for the business development. Top executive Keiichi Enoki oversaw the technical and overall development. A few months after DoCoMo launched i-mode in February 1999, DoCoMo's competitors launched very similar mobile data services:
  
   KDDI
  
  launched
  
   EZweb
  
  , and
  
   J-Phone
  
  launched
  
   J-Sky
  
  . Vodafone later acquired J-Phone including J-Sky, renaming the service
  
   Vodafone live!
  
  , although initially this was different from Vodafone live! in Europe and other markets. In addition, Vodafone KK was acquired by
  
   SoftBank
  
  , an operator of Yahoo! Japan in October, 2006 and changed the name to
  
   SoftBank Mobile
  
  . As of June 2006, the mobile data services I-Mode, EZweb, and J-Sky, had over 80 million subscribers in Japan.
 
  Since 2003, i-mode center is called CiRCUS, which consists of 400
  
   NEC
  
  NX7000
  
   HP-UX
  
  servers and occupies 4,600 m² floor space in DoCoMo's
  
   Kawasaki
  
  office. The operation support system is called CARNiVAL, which is hosted in the
  
   Sanno Park Tower
  
  .
 
  i-mode usage in Japan peaked around 2008. As of 2016, it is still available, but has largely been eclipsed by the internet features in 3G smartphones.
  

    [1]
   


  Seeing the tremendous success of i-mode in Japan, many operators in Europe, Asia and Australia sought to license the service through partnership with DoCoMo. Takeshi Natsuno was behind the expansion of i-mode to 17 countries worldwide. Kamel Maamria who was a partner with the Boston Consulting Group and who was supporting Mr. Natsuno is also thought to have had a major role in the expansion of the first Japanese service ever outside Japan.
 
  i-mode showed very fast take-up in the various countries where it was launched which led to more operators seeking to launch i-mode in their markets with the footprint reaching a total of 17 markets worldwide.
 
  While the i-mode service was an exceptional service which positioned DoCoMo as the global leader in value add services, another key success factor for i-mode was the Japanese smartphone makers who developed state of the art handsets to support i-mode. As i-mode was exported to the rest of the world, Nokia and other major handset vendors who controlled the markets at the time, refused at first to support i-mode by developing handsets which support the i-mode service. The operators who decided to launch i-mode had to rely on Japanese vendors who had no experience in international markets. As i-mode showed success in these markets, some vendors started customizing some of their handsets to support i-mode, however, the support was only partial and came late in time.
 
  While the service was successful during the first years after launch, the lack of adequate handsets and the emergence of new handsets from new vendors which supported new Internet services on one hand, and a change of leadership of i-mode in Docomo, lead to a number of operators to migrate or integrate i-mode into new mobile Internet services. These efforts were ultimately unsuccessful, and i-mode never became popular outside of Japan.
  

    [2]
   


  i-mode was launched in the following countries:
 
  Some typical features include the "
  
   clamshell
  
  " model with large displays (240x320 pixels) and in many models, a display on either side. Additionally the phones have many extra features, e.g. a megapixel
  
   digital camera
  
  . The displays normally have 65,536 colors but the newest models have as many as 262,144 colors.
 