


   Jolla
   
    Oy
   



    [1]
   

  (sometimes referred to as
  
   Jolla Ltd.
  
  ) is a
  
   Finnish
  
  technology company; a vendor of
  
   mobile devices
  


    [2]
   

  and the developer of
  
   Sailfish OS
  
  .
  

    [3]
   

  Headquartered in Helsinki, Finland, Jolla has its own
  
   research and development
  
  offices in
  
   Helsinki
  
  ,
  
   Tampere
  
  and
  
   Cyberport
  
  , Hong Kong. Jolla was founded in 2011 by former Nokia staff of the
  
   MeeGo
  
  project team to utilise the MeeGo opportunities and its
  
   "endless possibilities"
  
  .
 
  Pronounced 'yolla', the company name is
  
   Finnish
  
  for
  
   dinghy
  
  (a small agile boat or life rescue boat). It was intended as an ironic joke about the "burning platform memo" which contained the metaphor to "jump into the cold sea water" or "burn with burning platform" used in context of the Nokia business activities, in the memo leaked by then-Nokia CEO
  
   Stephen Elop
  
  in February 2011, with
  
   Osborne effect
  
  -like consequences.
  

    [4]
   




  In 2005,
  
   Nokia
  
  created a new
  
   Linux
  
  operating system called OS2005, which shipped with the
  
   Nokia 770 Internet Tablet
  
  . It was renamed
  
   Maemo
  
  (version 5) and shipped with the
  
   Nokia N900
  
  in 2009. An alliance Nokia and Intel merged their Maemo and
  
   Moblin
  
  (also an open source Linux OS) projects, respectively, into a new project called
  
   MeeGo
  
  in 2010. Nokia announced that year that the
  
   N8
  
  would be the last flagship phone to run
  
   Symbian
  
  , and "Going forward, N-series devices will be based on MeeGo".
  

    [5]
   


  But unexpectedly in 2011 the MeeGo project was declared cancelled no matter whether
  
   MeeGo
  
  would or wouldn't achieve any success. In compliance with agreements with Intel, only one MeeGo device was released, the
  
   Nokia N9
  
  , which achieved iconic status.
 
  Despite the N9 market success the MeeGo project in Nokia was already sentenced and a general atmosphere around it was having more and more negative influence on the MeeGo team and other Nokia employees. As a result, in October 2011, some of the MeeGo team left Nokia to form new project of Jolla aimed to develop new opportunities created with the Linux MeeGo OS, using funding from Nokia's "Bridge" program which helps establish and support start-up companies by ex-Nokia employees.
  

    [6]
   



    [7]
   



    [8]
   


  Nokia at that time was supporting almost all employees leaving the company with €25,000, but Jolla's founders had not been given any rights to patents or other
  
   intellectual property
  
  to Jolla. Jolla's
  
   Sailfish OS
  
  , which used middleware core stack of
  
   Mer
  
  is a direct successor to Nokia and Intel's MeeGo and the
  
   Jolla (mobile phone)
  
  is successor of N9, however used only the open-sourced components of MeeGo, while the closed-source user interface design (of codename Harmattan) for all future devices had to be developed from scratch. As a result, new mobile standards were established together with Mer.
 
  Jolla went public on 6 July 2012, announcing its intention to develop new
  
   smartphones
  
  that used a gesture-oriented swipe interface corresponding to former Nokia's Harmattan UI experience. They named their operating system "
  
   Sailfish
  
  ", which is a result of Mer and includes a gesture-based user interface developed using the
  
   Qt
  
  ,
  
   QML
  
  and
  
   HTML5
  
  , as did Nokia's N9.
 
  Jolla cooperated with others to grow their application's and MeeGo ecosystem.
  

    [9]
   

  Jolla announced on 17 September 2013 that their phone will be capable of running Android applications, thanks to built in
  
   Alien Dalvik
  
  , though due to formal limitation direct access to Google Play Store needed to be installed by end user manually.
  

    [10]
   


  On 7 July 2015, after failure of cooperation with Chinese manufacturer on delivery of
  
   Jolla Tablet
  
  , Jolla announced it would spin out its hardware operations to a brand new company and will continue to focus on current activities as a developer and licensor of the Sailfish OS.
  

    [11]
   


  In November 2015, Jolla had to lay off half of its employees due to financial problems caused by delayed financing from investor. On December 21, 2015, after enforced cancelling of Jolla Tablet project, Jolla announced that they would be "shipping a small batch of the Jolla Tablet to early backers during early 2016" which were disposable but "all of our backers will not get a Jolla Tablet"
  

    [12]
   

  because Chinese manufacturer has sold already produced batch in consequence of delayed financing and it was impossible to produce any next one as essential components were not produced any more.
 
  One of elements of the ecosystem is the harbour.jolla.com site, which is devoted to submitting, managing and selling applications at the Jolla Store. Consumers can install available software directly on their Sailfish devices.
 
  Software can be submitted on a free or commercial basis, using either the Sailfish OS or Android OS applications.
 
  The Jolla Harbour and Jolla Store support only free applications. The subsystem for payments is under active development to avoid problems with monetizing software.
 
  For developers and software enthusiasts, sailfishos.org
  

    [16]
   

  collects and publishes an online compendium of knowledge, links and instructions on:
 
  Sailfish OS is able to run:
 
  All Android software available from the Jolla "harbour" store were tested with a real Jolla device. Android or MeeGo or Linux software can be downloaded from any 3rd party e.g. Google store or any other source, due to Sailfish OS openness policy. From launch, this has given the devices access to a large number of applications, which was estimated above 0.5M unique software pieces at the time of the device launch.
 
  Because Sailfish is Linux and use Qt and Sailfish SDK is in Qt, it is possible to port applications without significant effort, including the following sources:
 
  For easy development and porting the Sailfish SDK emulates the whole device, the whole OS and its behaviour using isolated virtual machine on host computer e.g. Windows or Mac or Linux. As it is fully
  
   emulated
  
  , not
  
   simulated
  
  , and Jolla strongly declares it is possible to test behaviour like with real device when using Jolla SDK developer's environment. So it is possible to develop and test software without using a Jolla device. The SDK is updated for free adequately to the OS development. Also its documentation and tutorials/examples which are prepared together with community and developers requests.
 