

  An
  
   organic light-emitting diode
  
  (
  
   OLED
  
  ) is a
  
   light-emitting diode
  
  (LED) in which the
  
   emissive
  

   electroluminescent
  
  layer is a film of
  
   organic compound
  
  that emits light in response to an electric current. This layer of
  
   organic semiconductor
  
  is situated between two electrodes; typically, at least one of these electrodes is transparent. OLEDs are used to create
  
   digital displays
  
  in devices such as
  
   television
  
  screens,
  
   computer monitors
  
  , portable systems such as
  
   mobile phones
  
  ,
  
   handheld game consoles
  
  and
  
   PDAs
  
  . A major area of research is the development of white OLED devices for use in
  
   solid-state lighting
  
  applications.
  

    [1]
   



    [2]
   



    [3]
   


  There are two main families of OLED: those based on small molecules and those employing
  
   polymers
  
  . Adding mobile
  
   ions
  
  to an OLED creates a
  
   light-emitting electrochemical cell
  
  (LEC) which has a slightly different mode of operation. OLED displays can use either
  
   passive-matrix
  
  (PMOLED) or
  
   active-matrix
  
  (AMOLED) addressing schemes. Passive matrix OLEDs (PMOLED) uses a simple control scheme in which you control each row (or line) in the display sequentially
  

    [4]
   

  whereas active-matrix OLEDs (
  
   AMOLED
  
  ) require a
  
   thin-film transistor
  
  backplane to switch each individual pixel on or off, but allow for higher resolution and larger display sizes.
 
  An OLED display works without a
  
   backlight
  
  ; thus, it can display deep
  
   black levels
  
  and can be thinner and lighter than a
  
   liquid crystal display
  
  (LCD). In low ambient light conditions (such as a dark room), an OLED screen can achieve a higher
  
   contrast ratio
  
  than an LCD, regardless of whether the LCD uses
  
   cold cathode fluorescent lamps
  
  or an
  
   LED backlight
  
  .
 



   André Bernanose
  
  and co-workers at the
  
   Nancy-Université
  
  in France made the first observations of
  
   electroluminescence
  
  in organic materials in the early 1950s. They applied high alternating voltages in air to materials such as
  
   acridine orange
  
  , either deposited on or dissolved in cellulose or cellophane thin films. The proposed mechanism was either direct excitation of the dye molecules or excitation of electrons.
  

    [5]
   



    [6]
   



    [7]
   



    [8]
   


  In 1960
  
   Martin Pope
  
  and some of his co-workers at
  
   New York University
  
  developed
  
   ohmic
  
  dark-injecting electrode contacts to organic crystals.
  

    [9]
   



    [10]
   



    [11]
   

  They further described the necessary energetic requirements (
  
   work functions
  
  ) for hole and electron injecting electrode contacts. These contacts are the basis of charge injection in all modern OLED devices. Pope's group also first observed direct current (DC) electroluminescence under vacuum on a single pure crystal of
  
   anthracene
  
  and on anthracene crystals doped with
  
   tetracene
  
  in 1963
  

    [12]
   

  using a small area silver electrode at 400
  
   volts
  
  . The proposed mechanism was field-accelerated electron excitation of molecular fluorescence.
 
  Pope's group reported in 1965
  

    [13]
   

  that in the absence of an external electric field, the electroluminescence in anthracene crystals is caused by the recombination of a thermalized electron and hole, and that the conducting level of anthracene is higher in energy than the
  
   exciton
  
  energy level. Also in 1965, W. Helfrich and W. G. Schneider of the
  
   National Research Council
  
  in Canada produced double injection recombination electroluminescence for the first time in an anthracene single crystal using hole and electron injecting electrodes,
  

    [14]
   

  the forerunner of modern double-injection devices. In the same year,
  
   Dow Chemical
  
  researchers patented a method of preparing electroluminescent cells using high-voltage (500–1500 V) AC-driven (100–3000 Hz) electrically insulated one millimetre thin layers of a melted phosphor consisting of ground anthracene powder, tetracene, and
  
   graphite
  
  powder.
  

    [15]
   

  Their proposed mechanism involved electronic excitation at the contacts between the graphite particles and the anthracene molecules.
 
  Roger Partridge made the first observation of electroluminescence from polymer films at the
  
   National Physical Laboratory
  
  in the United Kingdom. The device consisted of a film of poly(
  
   N-vinylcarbazole
  
  ) up to 2.2 micrometers thick located between two charge injecting electrodes. The results of the project were patented in 1975
  

    [16]
   

  and published in 1983.
  

    [17]
   



    [18]
   



    [19]
   



    [20]
   


  Hong Kong-born American physical chemist
  
   Ching W. Tang
  
  and his co-worker
  
   Steven Van Slyke
  
  at
  
   Eastman Kodak
  
  built the first practical OLED device in 1987.
  

    [21]
   

  This was a revolution for the technology. This device used a novel two-layer structure with separate hole transporting and electron transporting layers such that recombination and light emission occurred in the middle of the organic layer; this resulted in a reduction in operating voltage and improvements in efficiency.
 
  Research into polymer electroluminescence culminated in 1990 with J. H. Burroughes
  
   et al.
  
  at the
  
   Cavendish Laboratory
  
  in Cambridge reporting a high efficiency green light-emitting polymer based device using 100 nm thick films of
  
   poly(p-phenylene vinylene)
  
  .
  

    [22]
   



   Universal Display Corporation
  
  holds the majority of patents concerning the commercialization of OLEDs.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  A typical OLED is composed of a layer of organic materials situated between two electrodes, the
  
   anode
  
  and
  
   cathode
  
  , all deposited on a
  
   substrate
  
  . The organic molecules are electrically conductive as a result of
  
   delocalization
  
  of
  
   pi electrons
  
  caused by
  
   conjugation
  
  over part or all of the molecule. These materials have conductivity levels ranging from insulators to conductors, and are therefore considered
  
   organic semiconductors
  
  . The highest occupied and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (
  
   HOMO and LUMO
  
  ) of organic semiconductors are analogous to the
  
   valence
  
  and
  
   conduction
  
  bands of inorganic semiconductors.
  

    [23]
   


  Originally, the most basic polymer OLEDs consisted of a single organic layer. One example was the first light-emitting device synthesised by J. H. Burroughes
  
   et al.
  
  , which involved a single layer of
  
   poly(p-phenylene vinylene)
  
  . However multilayer OLEDs can be fabricated with two or more layers in order to improve device efficiency. As well as conductive properties, different materials may be chosen to aid charge injection at electrodes by providing a more gradual electronic profile,
  

    [24]
   

  or block a charge from reaching the opposite electrode and being wasted.
  

    [25]
   

  Many modern OLEDs incorporate a simple bilayer structure, consisting of a conductive layer and an emissive layer. More recent developments in OLED architecture improves quantum efficiency (up to 19%) by using a graded heterojunction.
  

    [26]
   

  In the graded heterojunction architecture, the composition of hole and electron-transport materials varies continuously within the emissive layer with a dopant emitter. The graded heterojunction architecture combines the benefits of both conventional architectures by improving charge injection while simultaneously balancing charge transport within the emissive region.
  

    [27]
   


  During operation, a voltage is applied across the OLED such that the anode is positive with respect to the cathode. Anodes are picked based upon the quality of their optical transparency, electrical conductivity, and chemical stability.
  

    [28]
   

  A current of
  
   electrons
  
  flows through the device from cathode to anode, as electrons are injected into the LUMO of the organic layer at the cathode and withdrawn from the HOMO at the anode. This latter process may also be described as the injection of
  
   electron holes
  
  into the HOMO. Electrostatic forces bring the electrons and the holes towards each other and they recombine forming an
  
   exciton
  
  , a bound state of the electron and hole. This happens closer to the emissive layer, because in organic semiconductors holes are generally more
  
   mobile
  
  than electrons. The decay of this excited state results in a relaxation of the energy levels of the electron, accompanied by emission of
  
   radiation
  
  whose
  
   frequency
  
  is in the
  
   visible region
  
  . The frequency of this radiation depends on the
  
   band gap
  
  of the material, in this case the difference in energy between the HOMO and LUMO.
 
  As electrons and holes are
  
   fermions
  
  with half integer
  
   spin
  
  , an exciton may either be in a
  
   singlet state
  
  or a
  
   triplet state
  
  depending on how the spins of the electron and hole have been combined. Statistically three triplet excitons will be formed for each singlet exciton. Decay from triplet states (
  
   phosphorescence
  
  ) is spin forbidden, increasing the timescale of the transition and limiting the internal efficiency of fluorescent devices.
  
   Phosphorescent organic light-emitting diodes
  
  make use of
  
   spin–orbit interactions
  
  to facilitate
  
   intersystem crossing
  
  between singlet and triplet states, thus obtaining emission from both singlet and triplet states and improving the internal efficiency.
 

   Indium tin oxide
  
  (ITO) is commonly used as the anode material. It is transparent to visible light and has a high
  
   work function
  
  which promotes injection of holes into the HOMO level of the organic layer. A typical conductive layer may consist of
  
   PEDOT:PSS
  


    [29]
   

  as the HOMO level of this material generally lies between the workfunction of ITO and the HOMO of other commonly used polymers, reducing the energy barriers for hole injection. Metals such as
  
   barium
  
  and
  
   calcium
  
  are often used for the cathode as they have low
  
   work functions
  
  which promote injection of electrons into the LUMO of the organic layer.
  

    [30]
   

  Such metals are reactive, so they require a capping layer of
  
   aluminium
  
  to avoid degradation.
 
  Experimental research has proven that the properties of the anode, specifically the anode/hole transport layer (HTL) interface topography plays a major role in the efficiency, performance, and lifetime of organic light emitting diodes. Imperfections in the surface of the anode decrease anode-organic film interface adhesion, increase electrical resistance, and allow for more frequent formation of non-emissive dark spots in the OLED material adversely affecting lifetime. Mechanisms to decrease anode roughness for ITO/glass substrates include the use of thin films and self-assembled monolayers. Also, alternative substrates and anode materials are being considered to increase OLED performance and lifetime. Possible examples include single crystal sapphire substrates treated with gold (Au) film anodes yielding lower work functions, operating voltages, electrical resistance values, and increasing lifetime of OLEDs.
  

    [31]
   


  Single carrier devices are typically used to study the
  
   kinetics
  
  and charge transport mechanisms of an organic material and can be useful when trying to study energy transfer processes. As current through the device is composed of only one type of charge carrier, either electrons or holes, recombination does not occur and no light is emitted. For example, electron only devices can be obtained by replacing ITO with a lower work function metal which increases the energy barrier of hole injection. Similarly, hole only devices can be made by using a cathode made solely of aluminium, resulting in an energy barrier too large for efficient electron injection.
  

    [32]
   



    [33]
   



    [34]
   


  Balanced charge injection and transfer are required to get high internal efficiency, pure emission of luminance layer without contaminated emission from charge transporting layers, and high stability. A common way to balance charge is optimizing the thickness of the charge transporting layers but is hard to control. Another way is using the exciplex. Exciplex formed between hole-transporting (p-type) and electron-transporting (n-type) side chains to localize electron-hole pairs. Energy is then transferred to luminophore and provide high efficiency. An example of using exciplex is grafting Oxadiazole and carbazole side units in red diketopyrrolopyrrole-doped Copolymer main chain shows improved external quantum efficiency and color purity in no optimized OLED.
  

    [35]
   


  Efficient OLEDs using small molecules were first developed by Dr.
  
   Ching W. Tang
  

   et al.
  


    [21]
   

  at
  
   Eastman Kodak
  
  . The term OLED traditionally refers specifically to this type of device, though the term SM-OLED is also in use.
  

    [23]
   


  Molecules commonly used in OLEDs include organometallic
  
   chelates
  
  (for example
  
   Alq
   
    3
   

  , used in the organic light-emitting device reported by Tang
  
   et al.
  
  ), fluorescent and phosphorescent dyes and conjugated
  
   dendrimers
  
  . A number of materials are used for their charge transport properties, for example
  
   triphenylamine
  
  and derivatives are commonly used as materials for hole transport layers.
  

    [36]
   

  Fluorescent dyes can be chosen to obtain light emission at different wavelengths, and compounds such as
  
   perylene
  
  ,
  
   rubrene
  
  and
  
   quinacridone
  
  derivatives are often used.
  

    [37]
   

  Alq
  
   3
  
  has been used as a green emitter, electron transport material and as a host for yellow and red emitting dyes.
 
  The production of small molecule devices and displays usually involves
  
   thermal evaporation
  
  in a vacuum. This makes the production process more expensive and of limited use for large-area devices, than other processing techniques. However, contrary to polymer-based devices, the
  
   vacuum deposition
  
  process enables the formation of well controlled, homogeneous films, and the construction of very complex multi-layer structures. This high flexibility in layer design, enabling distinct charge transport and charge blocking layers to be formed, is the main reason for the high efficiencies of the small molecule OLEDs.
 
  Coherent emission from a laser dye-doped tandem SM-OLED device, excited in the pulsed regime, has been demonstrated.
  

    [38]
   

  The emission is nearly diffraction limited with a spectral width similar to that of broadband dye lasers.
  

    [39]
   


  Researchers report luminescence from a single polymer molecule, representing the smallest possible organic light-emitting diode (OLED) device.
  

    [40]
   

  Scientists will be able to optimize substances to produce more powerful light emissions. Finally, this work is a first step towards making molecule-sized components that combine electronic and optical properties. Similar components could form the basis of a molecular computer.
  

    [41]
   


  Polymer light-emitting diodes (PLED), also light-emitting polymers (LEP), involve an
  
   electroluminescent
  

   conductive polymer
  
  that emits
  
   light
  
  when connected to an external voltage. They are used as a
  
   thin film
  
  for
  
   full-spectrum
  
  colour displays. Polymer OLEDs are quite efficient and require a relatively small amount of power for the amount of light produced.
 
  Vacuum deposition is not a suitable method for forming thin films of polymers. However, polymers can be processed in solution, and
  
   spin coating
  
  is a common method of depositing thin polymer films. This method is more suited to forming large-area films than thermal evaporation. No vacuum is required, and the emissive materials can also be applied on the
  
   substrate
  
  by a technique derived from commercial
  
   inkjet
  
  printing.
  

    [42]
   



    [43]
   

  However, as the application of subsequent layers tends to dissolve those already present, formation of multilayer structures is difficult with these methods. The metal cathode may still need to be deposited by thermal evaporation in vacuum. An alternative method to vacuum deposition is to deposit a
  
   Langmuir-Blodgett film
  
  .
 
  Typical polymers used in pleaded displays include derivatives of
  
   poly(
   
    p
   
   -phenylene vinylene)
  
  and
  
   polyfluorene
  
  .
  
   Substitution
  
  of side chains onto the polymer backbone may determine the colour of emitted light
  

    [44]
   

  or the stability and solubility of the polymer for performance and ease of processing.
  

    [45]
   

  While unsubstituted poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV) is typically insoluble, a number of PPVs and related poly(naphthalene vinylene)s (PNVs) that are soluble in organic solvents or water have been prepared via
  
   ring opening metathesis polymerization
  
  .
  

    [46]
   



    [47]
   



    [48]
   

  These water-soluble polymers or conjugated poly electrolytes (CPEs) also can be used as hole injection layers alone or in combination with nanoparticles like graphene.
  

    [49]
   


  Phosphorescent organic light emitting diodes use the principle of electrophosphorescence to convert electrical energy in an OLED into light in a highly efficient manner,
  

    [51]
   



    [52]
   

  with the internal quantum efficiencies of such devices approaching 100%.
  

    [53]
   


  Typically, a polymer such as poly(
  
   N-vinylcarbazole
  
  ) is used as a host material to which an organometallic
  
   complex
  
  is added as a dopant.
  
   Iridium complexes
  


    [52]
   

  such as Ir(mppy)
  
   3
  


    [50]
   

  are currently the focus of research, although complexes based on other heavy metals such as platinum
  

    [51]
   

  have also been used.
 
  The heavy metal atom at the centre of these complexes exhibits strong spin-orbit coupling, facilitating
  
   intersystem crossing
  
  between
  
   singlet
  
  and
  
   triplet
  
  states. By using these phosphorescent materials, both singlet and triplet excitons will be able to decay radiatively, hence improving the internal quantum efficiency of the device compared to a standard pleaded where only the singlet states will contribute to emission of light.
 
  Applications of OLEDs in solid state lighting require the achievement of high brightness with good
  
   CIE coordinates
  
  (for white emission). The use of macromolecular species like polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes (POSS) in conjunction with the use of phosphorescent species such as Ir for printed OLEDs have exhibited brightnesses as high as 10,000 cd/m
  
   2
  
  .
  

    [54]
   


  Patternable organic light-emitting devices use a light or heat activated electroactive layer. A latent material (
  
   PEDOT-TMA
  
  ) is included in this layer that, upon activation, becomes highly efficient as a hole injection layer. Using this process, light-emitting devices with arbitrary patterns can be prepared.
  

    [59]
   


  Colour patterning can be accomplished by means of laser, such as radiation-induced sublimation transfer (RIST).
  

    [60]
   


  Organic vapour jet printing (OVJP) uses an inert carrier gas, such as
  
   argon
  
  or
  
   nitrogen
  
  , to transport evaporated organic molecules (as in organic vapour phase deposition). The gas is expelled through a
  
   micrometre
  
  -sized nozzle or nozzle array close to the substrate as it is being translated. This allows printing arbitrary multilayer patterns without the use of solvents.
 
  Conventional OLED displays are formed by vapor thermal evaporation (VTE) and are patterned by shadow-mask. A mechanical mask has openings allowing the vapor to pass only on the desired location.
 
  Like
  
   ink jet material depositioning
  
  , inkjet etching (IJE) deposits precise amounts of solvent onto a substrate designed to selectively dissolve the substrate material and induce a structure or pattern. Inkjet etching of polymer layers in OLED's can be used to increase the overall out-coupling efficiency. In OLEDs, light produced from the emissive layers of the OLED is partially transmitted out of the device and partially trapped inside the device by
  
   total internal reflection
  
  (TIR). This trapped light is wave-guided along the interior of the device until it reaches an edge where it is dissipated by either absorption or emission. Inkjet etching can be used to selectively alter the polymeric layers of OLED structures to decrease overall TIR and increase out-coupling efficiency of the OLED. Compared to a non-etched polymer layer, the structured polymer layer in the OLED structure from the IJE process helps to decrease the TIR of the OLED device. IJE solvents are commonly
  
   organic
  
  instead of water based due to their non-acidic nature and ability to effectively dissolve materials at temperatures under the boiling point of water.
  

    [61]
   


  For a high resolution display like a TV, a
  
   TFT
  
  backplane is necessary to drive the pixels correctly. Currently, low temperature
  
   polycrystalline silicon
  
  (LTPS) –
  
   thin-film transistor
  
  (TFT) is used for commercial
  
   AMOLED
  
  displays. LTPS-TFT has variation of the performance in a display, so various compensation circuits have been reported.
  

    [62]
   

  Due to the size limitation of the
  
   excimer laser
  
  used for LTPS, the
  
   AMOLED
  
  size was limited. To cope with the hurdle related to the panel size, amorphous-silicon/microcrystalline-silicon backplanes have been reported with large display prototype demonstrations.
  

    [63]
   


  Transfer-printing is an emerging technology to assemble large numbers of parallel OLED and AMOLED devices efficiently. It takes advantage of standard metal deposition,
  
   photolithography
  
  , and etching to create alignment marks commonly on glass or other device substrates. Thin polymer adhesive layers are applied to enhance resistance to particles and surface defects. Microscale ICs are transfer-printed onto the adhesive surface and then baked to fully cure adhesive layers. An additional photosensitive polymer layer is applied to the substrate to account for the topography caused by the printed ICs, reintroducing a flat surface. Photolithography and etching removes some polymer layers to uncover conductive pads on the ICs. Afterwards, the anode layer is applied to the device backplane to form bottom electrode. OLED layers are applied to the anode layer with conventional
  
   vapor deposition
  
  , and covered with a conductive metal electrode layer. As of 2011
  

    [update]
   

  transfer-printing was capable to print onto target substrates up to 500mm X 400mm. This size limit needs to expand for transfer-printing to become a common process for the fabrication of large OLED/AMOLED displays.
  

    [64]
   


  The different manufacturing process of OLEDs lends itself to several advantages over
  
   flat panel displays
  
  made with LCD technology.
 
  OLED technology is used in commercial applications such as displays for mobile phones and portable
  
   digital media players
  
  , car radios and
  
   digital cameras
  
  among others. Such portable applications favor the high light output of OLEDs for readability in sunlight and their low power drain. Portable displays are also used intermittently, so the lower lifespan of organic displays is less of an issue. Prototypes have been made of flexible and rollable displays which use OLEDs' unique characteristics. Applications in flexible signs and lighting are also being developed.
  

    [88]
   


   Philips
  
  Lighting have made OLED lighting samples under the brand name "Lumiblade" available online
  

    [89]
   

  and
  
   Novaled AG
  
  based in Dresden, Germany, introduced a line of OLED desk lamps called "Victory" in September, 2011.
  

    [90]
   


  OLEDs have been used in most
  
   Motorola
  
  and
  
   Samsung
  
  color cell phones, as well as some
  
   HTC
  
  ,
  
   LG
  
  and
  
   Sony Ericsson
  
  models.
  

    [91]
   


   Nokia
  
  has also introduced some OLED products including the
  
   N85
  
  and the
  
   N86 8MP
  
  , both of which feature an AMOLED display. OLED technology can also be found in digital media players such as the Creative
  
   ZEN V
  
  , the
  
   iriver clix
  
  , the
  
   Zune HD
  
  and the Sony
  
   Walkman X Series
  
  .
 
  The
  
   Google
  
  and HTC
  
   Nexus One
  
  smartphone includes an AMOLED screen, as does HTC's own
  
   Desire
  
  and
  
   Legend
  
  phones. However, due to supply shortages of the Samsung-produced displays, certain HTC models will use Sony's
  
   SLCD
  
  displays in the future,
  

    [92]
   

  while the Google and Samsung
  
   Nexus S
  
  smartphone will use "Super Clear LCD" instead in some countries.
  

    [93]
   


  OLED displays were used in watches made by Fossil (JR-9465) and Diesel (DZ-7086).
 
  Other manufacturers of OLED panels include
  
   Anwell Technologies Limited
  
  (Hong Kong),
  

    [94]
   


   AU Optronics
  
  (Taiwan),
  

    [95]
   


   Chimei Innolux Corporation
  
  (Taiwan),
  

    [96]
   


   LG
  
  (Korea),
  

    [97]
   

  and others.
  

    [98]
   


  In 2009,
  
   Shearwater Research
  
  introduced the Predator as the first color OLED
  
   diving computer
  
  available with a user replaceable battery.
  

    [99]
   



    [100]
   



   DuPont
  
  stated in a press release in May 2010 that they can produce a 50-inch OLED TV in two minutes with a new printing technology. If this can be scaled up in terms of manufacturing, then the total cost of OLED TVs would be greatly reduced. DuPont also states that OLED TVs made with this less expensive technology can last up to 15 years if left on for a normal eight-hour day.
  

    [101]
   



    [102]
   


  The use of OLEDs may be subject to
  
   patents
  
  held by
  
   Universal Display Corporation
  
  ,
  
   Eastman Kodak
  
  ,
  
   DuPont
  
  ,
  
   General Electric
  
  ,
  
   Royal Philips Electronics
  
  , numerous universities and others.
  

    [103]
   

  There are by now thousands of patents associated with OLEDs, both from larger corporations and smaller technology companies.
  

    [23]
   



   RIM
  
  , the maker of
  
   BlackBerry
  
  smartphones, uses OLED displays in their
  
   BlackBerry 10
  
  devices.
 
  Flexible OLED displays are already being produced and these are used by manufacturers to create curved displays such as the
  
   Galaxy S7 Edge
  
  but so far there they are not in devices that can be flexed by the consumer.
  

    [104]
   

  Apart from the screen itself the circuit boards and batteries would need to be flexible.
  

    [105]
   

  Samsung demonstrated a roll-out display in 2016
  

    [106]
   

  .
 
  Textiles incorporating OLEDs are an innovation in the fashion world and pose for a way to integrate lighting to bring inert objects to a whole new level of fashion. The hope is to combine the comfort and low cost properties of textile with the OLEDs properties of illumination and low energy consumption. Although this scenario of illuminated clothing is highly plausible, challenges are still a road block. Some issues include: the lifetime of the OLED, rigidness of flexible foil substrates, and the lack of research in making more fabric like photonic textiles.
  

    [107]
   


  By 2004
  
   Samsung
  
  ,
  
   South Korea
  
  's largest
  
   conglomerate
  
  , was the world's largest OLED manufacturer, producing 40% of the OLED displays made in the world,
  

    [108]
   

  and as of 2010 has a 98% share of the global
  
   AMOLED
  
  market.
  

    [109]
   

  The company is leading the world of OLED industry, generating $100.2 million out of the total $475 million revenues in the global OLED market in 2006.
  

    [110]
   

  As of 2006, it held more than 600 American patents and more than 2800 international patents, making it the largest owner of AMOLED technology patents.
  

    [110]
   


  Samsung SDI announced in 2005 the world's largest OLED TV at the time, at 21 inches (53 cm).
  

    [111]
   

  This OLED featured the highest resolution at the time, of 6.22 million pixels. In addition, the company adopted active matrix based technology for its low power consumption and high-resolution qualities. This was exceeded in January 2008, when Samsung showcased the world's largest and thinnest OLED TV at the time, at 31 inches (78 cm) and 4.3 mm.
  

    [112]
   


  In May 2008, Samsung unveiled an ultra-thin 12.1 inch (30 cm) laptop OLED display concept, with a 1,280×768 resolution with infinite contrast ratio.
  

    [113]
   

  According to Woo Jong Lee, Vice President of the Mobile Display Marketing Team at Samsung SDI, the company expected OLED displays to be used in notebook PCs as soon as 2010.
  

    [114]
   


  In October 2008, Samsung showcased the world's thinnest OLED display, also the first to be "flappable" and bendable.
  

    [115]
   

  It measures just 0.05 mm (thinner than paper), yet a Samsung staff member said that it is "technically possible to make the panel thinner".
  

    [115]
   

  To achieve this thickness, Samsung etched an OLED panel that uses a normal glass substrate. The drive circuit was formed by low-temperature polysilicon TFTs. Also, low-molecular organic EL materials were employed. The pixel count of the display is 480 × 272. The contrast ratio is 100,000:1, and the luminance is 200 cd/m
  
   2
  
  . The colour reproduction range is 100% of the NTSC standard.
 
  In the same month, Samsung unveiled what was then the world's largest OLED Television at 40-inch with a
  
   Full HD
  
  resolution of
  
   1920 × 1080
  
  pixels.
  

    [116]
   

  In the FPD International, Samsung stated that its 40-inch OLED Panel is the largest size currently possible. The panel has a contrast ratio of 1,000,000:1, a colour gamut of 107% NTSC, and a luminance of 200 cd/m
  
   2
  
  (peak luminance of 600 cd/m
  
   2
  
  ).
 
  At the
  
   Consumer Electronics Show (CES)
  
  in January 2010, Samsung demonstrated a laptop computer with a large, transparent OLED display featuring up to 40% transparency
  

    [117]
   

  and an animated OLED display in a photo ID card.
  

    [118]
   


  Samsung's latest AMOLED smartphones use their
  
   Super AMOLED
  
  trademark, with the
  
   Samsung Wave S8500
  
  and
  
   Samsung i9000 Galaxy S
  
  being launched in June 2010. In January 2011 Samsung announced their Super AMOLED Plus displays, which offer several advances over the older
  
   Super AMOLED
  
  displays: real stripe matrix (50% more sub pixels), thinner form factor, brighter image and an 18% reduction in energy consumption.
  

    [119]
   


  At CES 2012, Samsung introduced the first 55" TV screen that uses Super OLED technology.
  

    [120]
   


  On January 8, 2013, at CES Samsung unveiled a unique curved 4K Ultra S9 OLED television, which they state provides an "IMAX-like experience" for viewers.
  

    [121]
   


  On August 13, 2013, Samsung announced availability of a 55-inch curved OLED TV (model KN55S9C) in the US at a price point of $8999.99.
  

    [122]
   


  On September 6, 2013, Samsung launched its 55-inch curved OLED TV (model KE55S9C) in the United Kingdom with John Lewis.
  

    [123]
   


  Samsung introduced the
  
   Galaxy Round
  
  smartphone in the Korean market in October 2013. The device features a 1080p screen, measuring 5.7 inches (14 cm), that curves on the vertical axis in a rounded case. The corporation has promoted the following advantages: A new feature called "Round Interaction" that allows users to look at information by tilting the handset on a flat surface with the screen off, and the feel of one continuous transition when the user switches between home screens.
  

    [124]
   


  The
  
   Sony CLIÉ PEG-VZ90
  
  was released in 2004, being the first PDA to feature an OLED screen.
  

    [126]
   

  Other Sony products to feature OLED screens include the MZ-RH1 portable minidisc recorder, released in 2006
  

    [127]
   

  and the
  
   Walkman X Series
  
  .
  

    [128]
   


  At the 2007
  
   Las Vegas
  

   Consumer Electronics Show
  
  (CES), Sony showcased 11-inch (28 cm, resolution 960×540) and 27-inch (68.5 cm), full HD resolution at
  
   1920 × 1080
  
  OLED TV models.
  

    [129]
   

  Both claimed 1,000,000:1
  
   contrast ratios
  
  and total thicknesses (including bezels) of 5 mm. In April 2007, Sony announced it would manufacture 1000 11-inch (28 cm) OLED TVs per month for market testing purposes.
  

    [130]
   

  On October 1, 2007, Sony announced that the 11-inch (28 cm) model, now called the
  
   XEL-1
  
  , would be released commercially;
  

    [125]
   

  the XEL-1 was first released in Japan in December 2007.
  

    [131]
   


  In May 2007, Sony publicly unveiled a video of a 2.5-inch flexible OLED screen which is only 0.3 millimeters thick.
  

    [132]
   

  At the Display 2008 exhibition, Sony demonstrated a 0.2 mm thick 3.5 inch (9 cm) display with a resolution of 320×200 pixels and a 0.3 mm thick 11 inch (28 cm) display with 960×540 pixels resolution, one-tenth the thickness of the XEL-1.
  

    [133]
   



    [134]
   


  In July 2008, a Japanese government body said it would fund a joint project of leading firms, which is to develop a key technology to produce large, energy-saving organic displays. The project involves one laboratory and 10 companies including Sony Corp.
  
   NEDO
  
  said the project was aimed at developing a core technology to mass-produce 40 inch or larger OLED displays in the late 2010s.
  

    [135]
   


  In October 2008, Sony published results of research it carried out with the
  
   Max Planck Institute
  
  over the possibility of mass-market bending displays, which could replace rigid LCDs and plasma screens. Eventually, bendable,
  
   see-through displays
  
  could be stacked to produce 3D images with much greater contrast ratios and
  
   viewing angles
  
  than existing products.
  

    [136]
   


  Sony exhibited a 24.5" (62 cm) prototype OLED 3D television during the Consumer Electronics Show in January 2010.
  

    [137]
   


  In January 2011, Sony announced the
  
   PlayStation Vita
  
  handheld game console (the successor to the
  
   PSP
  
  ) will feature a 5-inch OLED screen.
  

    [138]
   


  On February 17, 2011, Sony announced its 25" (63.5 cm) OLED Professional Reference Monitor aimed at the Cinema and high end Drama Post Production market.
  

    [139]
   


  On June 25, 2012, Sony and Panasonic announced a joint venture for creating low cost mass production OLED televisions by 2013.
  

    [140]
   


  As of 2010,
  
   LG Electronics
  
  produced one model of OLED television, the 15 inch 15EL9500
  

    [141]
   

  and had announced a 31" (78 cm) OLED 3D television for March 2011.
  

    [142]
   

  On December 26, 2011, LG officially announced the "world's largest 55" OLED panel" and featured it at CES 2012.
  

    [143]
   

  In late 2012, LG announces the launch of the 55EM9600 OLED television in Australia.
  

    [144]
   


  In January 2015, LG Display signed a long term agreement with Universal Display Corporation for the supply of OLED materials and the right to use their patented OLED emitters.
  

    [145]
   


  Lumiotec is the first company in the world developing and selling, since January 2011, mass-produced OLED lighting panels with such brightness and long lifetime. Lumiotec is a joint venture of Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, ROHM, Toppan Printing, and Mitsui & Co. On June 1, 2011,
  
   Mitsubishi
  
  installed a 6-meter OLED 'sphere' in Tokyo's Science Museum.
  

    [146]
   


  On January 6, 2011, Los Angeles based technology company Recom Group introduced the first small screen consumer application of the OLED at the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas. This was a 2.8" (7 cm) OLED display being used as a wearable video name tag.
  

    [147]
   

  At the Consumer Electronics Show in 2012, Recom Group introduced the world's first video mic flag incorporating three 2.8" (7 cm) OLED displays on a standard broadcaster's mic flag. The video mic flag allowed video content and advertising to be shown on a broadcasters standard mic flag.
  

    [148]
   


  BMW plans to use OLEDs in tail lights and interior lights in their future cars; however, OLEDs are currently too dim to be used for brake lights, headlights and indicators.
  

    [149]
   


  In 2014,
  
   Mitsubishi Chemical Corporation
  
  (MCC), a subsidiary of the
  
   Mitsubishi Chemical Holdings
  
  developed an
  
   organic light-emitting diode
  
  (OLED) panel with a life of 30,000 hours, twice that of conventional OLED panels.
  

    [150]
   


  The search for efficient OLED materials has been extensively supported by simulation methods. By now it is possible to calculate important properties completely computationally, independent of experimental input.
  

    [151]
   



    [152]
   

  This allows cost-efficient pre-screening of materials, prior to expensive synthesis and experimental characterisation.
 