

  A
  
   smartphone
  
  is a
  
   mobile phone
  
  (also known as cell phones or mobiles) with an advanced
  
   mobile operating system
  
  that combines features of a
  
   personal computer
  
  operating system with other features useful for mobile or handheld use.
  

    [1]
   



    [2]
   



    [3]
   

  Smartphones, which are pocket-sized, typically combine the features of a mobile phone, such as the abilities to place and receive voice calls and create and receive
  
   text messages
  
  , with those of other popular digital
  
   mobile devices
  
  like
  
   personal digital assistants
  
  (PDAs), such as an event calendar,
  
   media player
  
  ,
  
   video games
  
  ,
  
   GPS navigation
  
  ,
  
   digital camera
  
  and
  
   digital video camera
  
  . Smartphones can access the
  
   Internet
  
  and can run a variety of
  
   third-party software components
  
  ("
  
   apps
  
  " from places like
  
   Google Play Store
  
  or
  
   Apple App Store
  
  ). They typically have a
  
   color display
  
  with a
  
   graphical user interface
  
  that covers more than 76% of the front surface. The display is almost always a
  
   touchscreen
  
  and sometimes additionally a touch-enabled keyboard like the Priv/Passport BlackBerrys, which enables the user to use a
  
   virtual keyboard
  
  to type words and numbers and press
  
   onscreen icons
  
  to activate "app" features.
 
  In 1999, the Japanese firm
  
   NTT DoCoMo
  
  released the first smartphones to achieve mass adoption within a country.
  

    [4]
   

  Smartphones became widespread in the late 2000s. Most of those produced from 2012 onward have high-speed mobile broadband
  
   4G LTE
  
  ,
  
   motion sensors
  
  , and
  
   mobile payment
  
  features. In the third quarter of 2012, one billion smartphones were in use worldwide.
  

    [5]
   

  Global smartphone sales surpassed the sales figures for regular cell phones in early 2013.
  

    [6]
   


  Devices that combined telephony and
  
   computing
  
  were first conceptualized by
  
   Nikola Tesla
  
  in 1909 and
  
   Theodore Paraskevakos
  
  in 1971 and patented in 1974, and were offered for sale beginning in 1993. Paraskevakos was the first to introduce the concepts of intelligence,
  
   data processing
  
  and
  
   visual display screens
  
  into telephones. In 1971, while he was working with
  
   Boeing
  
  in
  
   Huntsville, Alabama
  
  , Paraskevakos demonstrated a
  
   transmitter
  
  and
  
   receiver
  
  that provided additional ways to communicate with remote equipment, however it did not yet have general purpose
  
   PDA
  
  applications in a wireless device typical of smartphones. They were installed at Peoples' Telephone Company in
  
   Leesburg, Alabama
  
  and were demonstrated to several telephone companies. The original and historic working models are still in the possession of Paraskevakos.
  

    [7]
   


  The first mobile phone to incorporate PDA features was a prototype developed by Frank Canova
  

    [9]
   

  in 1992 while at
  
   IBM
  
  and demonstrated that year at the
  
   COMDEX
  
  computer industry trade show. It included PDA features and other visionary mobile applications such as maps, stock reports and news. A refined version was marketed to consumers in 1994 by
  
   BellSouth
  
  under the name
  
   Simon Personal Communicator
  
  . The Simon was the first commercially available device that could be properly referred to as a "smartphone", although it was not called that in 1994.
  

    [9]
   



    [10]
   



    [11]
   

  In addition to placing and receiving cellular calls, Simon could send and receive
  
   faxes
  
  and
  
   emails
  
  and included an address book, calendar, appointment scheduler, calculator, world time clock and notepad, utilizing its touch screen display.
  

    [12]
   

  The term "smart phone" appeared in print as early as 1995, describing AT&T's PhoneWriter Communicator.
  

    [13]
   


   [
   


      non-primary source needed
     


   ]
  

  In the mid-late 1990s, many mobile phone users carried a separate dedicated PDA device, running early versions of operating systems such as
  
   Palm OS
  
  ,
  
   BlackBerry OS
  
  or
  
   Windows CE
  
  /
  
   Pocket PC
  
  .
  

    [1]
   

  These operating systems would later evolve into
  
   mobile operating systems
  
  . In March 1996,
  
   Hewlett-Packard
  
  released the
  
   OmniGo 700LX
  
  , a modified
  
   HP 200LX
  
  palmtop PC that supported a
  
   Nokia 2110
  
  phone with
  
   ROM
  
  -based software to support it. It had a 640×200 resolution CGA compatible four-shade gray-scale LCD screen and could be used to place and receive calls, and to create and receive text messages, emails and faxes. It was also 100%
  
   DOS
  
  5.0 compatible, allowing it to run thousands of existing software titles, including early versions of
  
   Windows
  
  .
 
  In August 1996,
  
   Nokia
  
  released the
  
   Nokia 9000 Communicator
  
  , a digital cellular phone based on the
  
   Nokia 2110
  
  with an integrated
  
   PDA
  
  based on the
  
   PEN/GEOS 3.0
  
  operating system from
  
   Geoworks
  
  . The two components were attached by a hinge in what became known as a
  
   clamshell design
  
  , with the display above and a physical
  
   QWERTY keyboard
  
  below. The PDA provided e-mail; calendar, address book, calculator and notebook applications; text-based Web browsing; and could send and receive faxes. When closed, the device could be used as a digital cellular phone. In June 1999
  
   Qualcomm
  
  released the "pdQ Smartphone", a
  
   CDMA
  
  digital
  
   PCS
  
  Smartphone with an integrated Palm PDA and Internet connectivity.
  

    [14]
   


  Subsequent landmark devices included:
 
  Smartphones before present-day Android-, iOS- and BlackBerry-based phones typically used the
  
   Symbian
  
  operating system. Originally developed by
  
   Psion
  
  , it was the world's most widely used smartphone operating system until the last quarter of 2010.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  In 1999, the Japanese firm
  
   NTT DoCoMo
  
  released the first smartphones to achieve mass adoption within a country. These phones ran on
  
   i-mode
  
  , which provided data transmission speeds up to 9.6 kbit/s.
  

    [21]
   

  Unlike future generations of wireless services, NTT DoCoMo's i-mode used
  
   cHTML
  
  , a language which restricted some aspects of traditional
  
   HTML
  
  in favor of increasing data speed for the devices. Limited functionality, small screens and limited bandwidth allowed for phones to use the slower data speeds available.
  

    [22]
   

  The rise of i-mode helped NTT DoCoMo accumulate an estimated 40 million subscribers by the end of 2001. It was also ranked first in market capitalization in Japan and second globally. This power would wane in the face of the rise of 3G and new phones with advanced wireless network capabilities.
  

    [23]
   

  Outside Japan smartphones were still rare until the introduction of the
  
   Danger Hiptop
  
  in 2002, which saw moderate success in the US as the
  
   T-Mobile
  
  Sidekick. Later, in the mid-2000s, devices based on Microsoft's
  
   Windows Mobile
  
  started to gain popularity among business users in the U.S. The
  
   BlackBerry
  
  later gained mass adoption in the U.S., and American users popularized the term "CrackBerry" in 2006 due to its addictive nature.
  

    [24]
   

  The company first released its GSM BlackBerry 6210, BlackBerry 6220, and BlackBerry 6230 devices in 2003.
  

    [25]
   


  Symbian was the most popular smartphone OS in Europe during the middle to late 2000s. Initially, Nokia's Symbian devices were focused on business, similar to Windows Mobile and BlackBerry devices at the time. From 2006 onwards, Nokia started producing entertainment-focused smartphones, popularized by the
  
   Nseries
  
  . In Asia, with the exception of Japan, the trend was similar to that of Europe.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  In 2003,
  
   Motorola
  
  launched the first smartphone to use
  
   Linux
  
  , the
  
   A760
  
  handset.
  

    [26]
   

  While the initial release was limited to a single high-end handset only available in the Asia-Pacific region, the maker's intention was to eventually use Linux on most of its handsets, including the lower-end models. Further models to use Linux such as the
  
   Motorola Ming
  
  A1200i in 2005 and several successors to the Ming line would be unveiled through 2010. In late 2009, Motorola released the
  
   Motorola Cliq
  
  ,
  

    [27]
   

  the first of Motorola's smartphones to run the Linux-based Android operating system.
 
  In early 2007,
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  introduced the
  
   iPhone
  
  , one of the first smartphones to use a
  
   multi-touch
  
  interface. The iPhone was notable for its use of a large touchscreen for direct finger input as its main means of interaction, instead of a stylus, keyboard, or keypad typical for smartphones at the time.
  

    [28]
   

  In October 2008, the first phone to use
  
   Android
  
  called the
  
   HTC Dream
  
  (also known as the T-Mobile G1) was released.
  

    [29]
   



    [30]
   

  Android is an
  
   open-source
  
  platform founded by
  
   Andy Rubin
  
  and now owned by
  
   Google
  
  .
  

    [31]
   



    [32]
   

  Although Android's adoption was relatively slow at first, it started to gain widespread popularity in 2010, and in early 2012 dominated the smartphone market share worldwide, which continues to this day.
  

    [33]
   


  These new platforms led to the decline of earlier ones.
  
   Microsoft
  
  , for instance, started a new OS from scratch, called
  
   Windows Phone
  
  . Nokia abandoned Symbian and partnered with Microsoft to use Windows Phone on its smartphones. Windows Phone then became the third-most-popular OS. Palm's
  
   webOS
  
  was bought by Hewlett-Packard and later sold to
  
   LG Electronics
  
  for use on LG
  
   smart TVs
  
  .
  
   BlackBerry Limited
  
  , formerly known as Research In Motion, also made a new platform based on
  
   QNX
  
  ,
  
   BlackBerry 10
  
  , which was later discontinued. The
  
   capacitive touchscreen
  
  also changed smartphone
  
   form factors
  
  . Before 2007, it was common for devices to have a physical numeric keypad or physical
  
   QWERTY
  
  keyboard in either a candybar or sliding form factor. However, by mid 2010s, almost all smartphones were touchscreen phones.
 
  In 2013,
  
   Fairphone
  
  launched its first "socially ethical" smartphone at the
  
   London Design Festival
  
  to address concerns regarding the sourcing of materials in the manufacturing.
  

    [34]
   

  In late 2013, QSAlpha commenced production of a smartphone designed entirely around security, encryption and identity protection.
  

    [35]
   

  Some companies began to release smartphones incorporating
  
   flexible displays
  
  to create curved form factors, such as the
  
   Samsung Galaxy Round
  
  and
  
   LG G Flex
  
  .
  

    [36]
   



    [37]
   



    [38]
   


  In October 2013,
  
   Motorola Mobility
  
  announced
  
   Project Ara
  
  , a concept for a
  
   modular smartphone
  
  platform that would allow users to customize and upgrade their phones with add-on modules that attached magnetically to a frame.
  

    [39]
   



    [40]
   

  Ara was retained by Google following its sale of Motorola Mobility to
  
   Lenovo
  
  ,
  

    [41]
   

  but was shelved in 2016.
  

    [42]
   

  That year, LG and Motorola both unveiled smartphones featuring a limited form of modularity for accessories; the
  
   LG G5
  
  allowed accessories to be installed via the removal of its battery compartment,
  

    [43]
   

  while the
  
   Moto Z
  
  utilizes accessories attached magnetically to the rear of the device.
  

    [44]
   


  By 2014,
  
   1440p
  
  displays began to appear on high-end smartphones.
  

    [45]
   

  In 2015, Sony released the
  
   Xperia Z5 Premium
  
  , featuring a
  
   4K resolution
  
  display, although only images and videos could actually be rendered at that resolution (all other software is upscaled from 1080p).
  

    [46]
   

  Microsoft, expanding upon the concept of Motorola's short-lived "Webtop", unveiled functionality for its
  
   Windows 10 operating system for phones
  
  that allows supported devices to be
  
   docked
  
  for use with a PC-styled
  
   desktop environment
  
  .
  

    [47]
   



    [48]
   

  Other major technologies began to trend in 2016, including a focus on
  
   virtual reality
  
  and
  
   augmented reality
  
  experiences catered towards smartphones, the newly-introduced
  
   USB-C
  
  connector, and improving LTE technologies.
  

    [49]
   



   Foldable
  
  OLED smartphones have been anticipated for years but have failed to materialize because of the relatively high failure rate when producing these screens.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  As well, creating a battery that can be folded is another hurdle.
  

    [50]
   


  One of the main characteristics of smartphones is their
  
   screen
  
  . It usually fills most of the phone's front surface (about 70%); screen size usually defines the size of a smartphone. Many have an
  
   aspect ratio
  
  of
  
   16:9
  
  ; some are
  
   4:3
  
  or other ratios. They are measured in diagonal
  
   inches
  
  , starting from 2.45 inches.
  

    [51]
   

  Phones with screens larger than 5.2 inches are often called "
  
   phablets
  
  ". Smartphones with screens over 4.5 inches commonly are shifted while using a single hand, since most thumbs cannot reach the entire screen surface, or used in place with both hands.
  
   Liquid-crystal displays
  
  are the most common; others are
  
   IPS
  
  ,
  
   LED
  
  ,
  
   OLED
  
  ,
  
   AMOLED
  
  and
  
   E Ink
  
  displays. In the 2010s,
  
   Braille
  
  screens, which can be used by visually impaired people are being developed. It is expected that Braille screens will use some type of
  
   microfluidics
  
  technology.
  

    [52]
   

  In addition, some displays are integrated with pressure sensitive digitizers such as those developed by
  
   Wacom
  
  and
  
   Samsung
  
  . These digitizers allow users to have greater precision when utilizing touch-screens for drawing or for jotting down notes.
  

    [53]
   


  As with
  
   cellphones
  
  , a range of accessories are sold for smartphones, including cases, screen protectors, power charging cables, add-on batteries, headphones, combined headphone-microphones which allow a person to use the phone without holding it to the ear, and
  
   Bluetooth
  
  -enabled
  
   powered speakers
  
  that enable users to listen to media files from their smartphones wirelessly. Cases range from relatively inexpensive rubber or soft plastic cases which provide moderate protection from bumps and good protection from scratches to more expensive, heavy-duty cases that combine a rubber padding with a hard outer shell. Some cases have a "book"-like form, with a cover that the user opens to use the device; when the cover is closed, it protects the screen. Some "book"-like cases have additional pockets for credit cards, thus enabling people to use them as
  
   wallets
  
  . Accessories include products sold by the manufacturer of the smartphone and compatible products made by other manufacturers.
 


    Android
   

  is a mobile operating system developed by
  
   Google
  
  , and backed by an industry consortium known as the
  
   Open Handset Alliance
  
  . It is an
  
   open source
  
  platform with optional
  
   proprietary
  
  components, including a suite of flagship software for
  
   Google services
  
  , and the application and content storefront
  
   Google Play
  
  .
  

    [54]
   

  Android was officially introduced via the release of its inaugural device, the
  
   HTC Dream
  
  (T-Mobile G1) on 20 October 2008.
  

    [55]
   

  As an open source product, Android has also been the subject of third-party development. Development groups have used the Android source code to develop and distribute their own modified versions of the operating system, such as
  
   CyanogenMod
  
  , to add features to the OS and provide newer versions of Android to devices that no longer receive official updates from their vendor.
  

    [56]
   



    [57]
   



    [58]
   


   Forked
  
  versions of Android have also been adopted by other vendors, such as
  
   Amazon.com
  
  , who used its "
  
   Fire OS
  
  " on a range of
  
   tablets
  
  and the
  
   Fire Phone
  
  .
  

    [59]
   



    [60]
   

  As it is a non-proprietary platform that has shipped on devices covering a wide range of market segments, Android has seen significant adoption.
  
   Gartner Research
  
  estimated that 325 million Android smartphones were sold during the fourth quarter of 2015, leading all other platforms.
  
   Samsung Electronics
  
  , who produces Android devices, was also the top smartphone vendor across all platforms in the same period of time.
  

    [61]
   

  Android is the top-selling smartphone OS in 2016.
  

    [62]
   



    [63]
   




    iOS
   

  (formerly
  
   iPhone OS
  
  ) is a
  
   proprietary
  
  mobile operating system developed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  primarily for its
  
   iPhone
  
  product line. The
  
   iPhone
  
  was first unveiled in January 2007. The device introduced numerous design concepts that have been adopted by modern smartphone platforms, such as the use of
  
   multi-touch
  
  gestures for navigation, eschewing physical controls such as physical keyboards in favor of those rendered by the operating system itself on its touchscreen (including the keyboard), and the use of
  
   skeumorphism
  
  —making features and controls within the user interface resemble real-world objects and concepts in order to improve their usability.
  

    [64]
   



    [65]
   

  In 2008, Apple introduced the
  
   App Store
  
  , a centralized storefront for purchasing new software for iPhone devices.
  

    [66]
   



    [67]
   

  iOS can also integrate with Apple's desktop music program
  
   iTunes
  
  to sync media to a personal computer.
  

    [68]
   



    [69]
   

  The dependency on a PC was removed with the introduction of
  
   iCloud
  
  on later versions of iOS, which provides synchronization of user data via internet servers between multiple devices.
  

    [70]
   

  The iPhone line's early dominance was credited with reshaping the smartphone industry, and helping make Apple one of the world's most valuable publicly traded companies by 2011. However, the iPhone and iOS have generally been in second place in worldwide market share.
  

    [61]
   



    [71]
   



    [72]
   



   Windows 10 Mobile
  
  (formerly known as
  
   Windows Phone
  
  ) is from
  
   Microsoft
  
  . It is closed source and proprietary. It has the third largest installed base on smartphones behind Android and iOS.
 
  Unveiled on February 15, 2010, Windows Phone includes a user interface inspired by Microsoft's
  

    Metro Design Language
   

  . It is integrated with Microsoft services such as
  
   OneDrive
  
  and Office,
  
   Xbox Music
  
  ,
  
   Xbox Video
  
  ,
  
   Xbox Live
  
  games and
  
   Bing
  
  , but also integrates with many other non-Microsoft services such as
  
   Facebook
  
  and
  
   Google accounts
  
  . Windows Phone devices are made primarily by
  
   Microsoft Mobile
  
  /
  
   Nokia
  
  , and also by
  
   HTC
  
  and
  
   Samsung
  
  .
 
  In January 2015, Microsoft announced that its Windows Phone brand will be phased out and replaced with Windows 10 Mobile, bringing tighter integration and unification with its PC counterpart
  
   Windows 10
  
  , and provide a platform for smartphones and tablets with screen sizes under 8 inches.
 
  Windows Mobile smartphone series has had poor adoption, that also led to a decrease in third-party applications, and some vendors ended their support for Windows Mobile altogether.
  

    [73]
   



    [74]
   

  As of 2016, Windows 10 Mobile global market share dropped below 0.6%.
  

    [75]
   


  Tizen is a Linux-based
  
   operating system
  
  for devices, including smartphones,
  
   tablets
  
  ,
  
   in-vehicle infotainment
  
  (IVI) devices, smart TVs,
  
   laptops
  
  and smart cameras. Tizen is a project within the
  
   Linux Foundation
  
  and is governed by a Technical Steering Group (TSG) composed of Samsung and Intel among others. In April 2014, Samsung released the Samsung Gear 2 and the Gear 2 Neo, running Tizen.
  

    [76]
   

  The
  
   Samsung Z1
  
  is the first smartphone produced by Samsung that runs Tizen; it was released in the
  
   Indian
  
  market on January 14, 2015.
  

    [77]
   


  The Sailfish OS is based on the
  
   Linux kernel
  
  and
  
   Mer
  
  .
  

    [78]
   

  Additionally Sailfish OS includes a partially or completely
  
   proprietary
  
  multi-tasking
  
   user interface
  
  programmed by
  
   Jolla
  
  . This user interface differentiate Jolla smartphones from others.
  

    [79]
   

  Sailfish OS is intended to be a system made by many of the MeeGo team, which left Nokia to form Jolla, utilizing funding from Nokia's "Bridge" program which helps establish and support start-up companies formed by ex-Nokia employees.
  

    [80]
   



    [81]
   



    [82]
   



   Ubuntu Touch
  
  (also known as
  
   Ubuntu Phone
  
  ) is a mobile version of the
  
   Ubuntu operating system
  
  developed by
  
   Canonical UK Ltd
  
  and Ubuntu Community.
  

    [83]
   

  It is designed primarily for touchscreen mobile devices such as smartphones and tablet computers.
 
  In early 2010s,
  
   BlackBerry Limited
  
  started making new devices on a new platform named "
  
   BlackBerry 10
  
  ", which is based on their
  
   BlackBerry Tablet OS
  
  , to replace the
  
   BlackBerry OS
  
  .
  

    [84]
   

  While the company has started to release smartphone based on the Android operating system in 2015, with the
  
   BlackBerry Priv
  
  ,
  

    [85]
   

  they claim there would be no new devices with BB10 and they would still support the OS.
  

    [86]
   


  In 1999,
  
   RIM
  
  released its first BlackBerry devices, providing secure real-time push-email communications on wireless devices. Services such as BlackBerry Messenger provide the integration of all communications into a single inbox. In September 2012, RIM announced that the 200 millionth BlackBerry smartphone was shipped. As of September 2014, there were around 46 million active BlackBerry service subscribers.
  

    [87]
   

  In early 2010s, RIM has undergone a platform transition, changing its company name to
  
   BlackBerry Limited
  
  and making new devices on a new platform named "
  
   BlackBerry 10
  
  ".
  

    [84]
   


  Windows Mobile was based on the
  
   Windows CE
  

   kernel
  
  and first appeared as the
  
   Pocket PC
  
  2000 operating system. Throughout its lifespan, the operating system was available in both touchscreen and non-touchscreen formats. It was supplied with a suite of applications developed with the Microsoft Windows API and was designed to have features and appearance somewhat similar to desktop versions of Windows. Third parties could develop software for Windows Mobile with no restrictions imposed by Microsoft. Software applications were eventually purchasable from Windows Marketplace for Mobile during the service's brief lifespan. Windows Mobile was eventually phased out in favor of
  
   Windows Phone
  
  OS.
 
  Symbian was originally developed by
  
   Psion
  
  as
  
   EPOC32
  
  . It was the world's most widely used smartphone operating system until Q4 2010, though the platform never gained popularity in the U.S., as it did in Europe and Asia. The first Symbian phone, the touchscreen Ericsson R380 Smartphone, was released in 2000,
  

    [88]
   



    [89]
   

  and was the first device marketed as a "smartphone".
  

    [90]
   

  It combined a PDA with a mobile phone.
  

    [91]
   

  Variants of Symbian OS began to emerge, most notably Symbian UIQ, MOAP and S60, each supported by different manufacturers. With the creation of Symbian Foundation in 2008, Symbian OS was unified under one variant under the stewardship of Nokia. In February 2011, Nokia announced that it would replace Symbian with Windows Phone as the operating system on all of its future smartphones, with the platform being abandoned over the following few years.
  

    [92]
   



   Firefox OS
  
  was demonstrated by
  
   Mozilla
  
  in February 2012. It was designed to have a complete community-based alternative system for mobile devices, using open standards and
  
   HTML5
  
  applications. The first commercially available Firefox OS phones were ZTE Open and Alcatel
  
   One Touch Fire
  
  . As of 2014, more companies had partnered with Mozilla including
  
   Panasonic
  
  (which was making a
  
   smart TV
  
  with Firefox OS) and Sony.
  

    [93]
   

  In December 2015, Mozilla announced that it would phase out development of Firefox OS for smartphones, and would reposition the project to focus on other forms of Internet-connected devices.
  

    [94]
   


  The Bada operating system for smartphones was announced by Samsung in November 2009.
  

    [95]
   



    [96]
   

  The first Bada-based phone was the
  
   Samsung Wave S8500
  
  , released in June 2010.
  

    [97]
   



    [98]
   

  Samsung shipped 4.5 million phones running Bada in Q2 of 2011.
  

    [99]
   

  In 2013, Bada merged with a similar platform called Tizen.
 
  webOS is a proprietary mobile operating system running on the Linux kernel, initially developed by Palm, which launched with the
  
   Palm Pre
  
  . After being acquired by HP, two phones (the
  
   Veer
  
  and the
  
   Pre 3
  
  ) and a tablet (the
  
   TouchPad
  
  ) running webOS were introduced in 2011. On August 18, 2011, HP announced that webOS hardware was to be discontinued
  

    [100]
   

  but would continue to support and update webOS software and develop the webOS ecosystem.
  

    [101]
   

  HP released webOS as open source under the name Open webOS, and plans to update it with additional features.
  

    [102]
   

  On February 25, 2013 HP announced the sale of WebOS to LG Electronics, who used the operating system for its current "smart" or Internet-connected TVs, but not smartphones. In January 2014,
  
   Qualcomm
  
  has announced that it has acquired technology patents from HP, which includes all the WebOS patents.
  

    [103]
   


  In late 2001,
  
   Handspring
  
  launched the
  
   Springboard
  
  GSM phone module with limited success. In May 2002, Handspring released the Palm OS
  
   Treo 270
  
  smartphone, which did not support Springboard, with both a touchscreen and a full keyboard. The Treo had wireless web browsing, email, calendar, a contact organizer and mobile third-party applications that could be downloaded or synced with a computer.
  

    [104]
   

  Handspring was purchased by
  
   Palm, Inc
  
  which released the
  
   Treo 600
  
  and continued releasing Treo devices with a few Treo devices using Windows Mobile.
 
  MeeGo is an operating system created from the source code of
  
   Moblin
  
  (produced by Intel) and
  
   Maemo
  
  (produced by Nokia). Before that, Nokia used Maemo on some of its smartphones and internet tablets (such as Nokia N810 and N900). MeeGo was originally envisioned to power a variety of devices from netbooks, tablets to smartphones and smart TVs. However, the only smartphones which used MeeGo was the
  
   Nokia N9
  
  and
  
   Nokia N950
  
  (MeeGo v1.2 Harmattan). Following Nokia's decision to move to Windows Phone OS in 2011 and to cease MeeGo development, the Linux Foundation canceled MeeGo in September 2011 in favor of the development of Tizen.
 
  The introduction of Apple's App Store for the iPhone and iPod Touch in July 2008 popularized manufacturer-hosted
  
   online distribution
  
  for third-party applications (
  
   software
  
  and
  
   computer programs
  
  ) focused on a single platform. There are a huge variety of apps, including
  
   video games
  
  , music products and business tools. Up until that point, smartphone application distribution depended on
  
   third-party sources
  
  providing applications for multiple platforms, such as
  
   GetJar
  
  ,
  
   Handango
  
  ,
  
   Handmark
  
  , and
  
   PocketGear
  
  . Following the success of the App Store, other smartphone manufacturers launched application stores, such as Google's Android Market (now
  
   Google Play Store
  
  ) and RIM's
  
   BlackBerry App World
  
  in April 2009. In February 2014, 93% of
  
   mobile developers
  
  were targeting smartphones first for mobile app development.
  

    [105]
   


  Since 1996, smartphone shipments have had positive growth. In November 2011, 27% of all photographs created were taken with camera-equipped smartphones.
  

    [106]
   

  In September 2012, a study concluded that 4 out of 5 smartphone owners use the device to shop online.
  

    [107]
   

  Global smartphone sales surpassed the sales figures for feature phones in early 2013.
  

    [6]
   

  Worldwide shipments of smartphones topped 1 billion units in 2013, up 38% from 2012's 725 million, while comprising a 55% share of the mobile phone market in 2013, up from 42% in 2012.
  

    [108]
   

  In Q1 2016 for the first time the shipments dropped by 3 percent
  
   year on year
  
  . The situation was caused by the maturing China market.
  

    [109]
   


  In 2011, Samsung had the highest shipment
  
   market share
  
  worldwide, followed by Apple. In 2013, Samsung had 31.3% market share, a slight increase from 30.3% in 2012, while Apple was at 15.3%, a decrease from 18.7% in 2012. Huawei, LG and Lenovo were at about 5% each, significantly better than 2012 figures, while others had about 40%, the same as the previous years figure. Only Apple lost market share, although their shipment volume still increased by 12.9 percent; the rest had significant increases in shipment volumes of 36 to 92 percent.
  

    [112]
   

  In Q1 2014, Samsung had a 31% share and Apple had 16%.
  

    [113]
   

  In Q4 2014, Apple had a 20.4% share and Samsung had 19.9%.
  

    [114]
   

  In Q2 2016, Samsung had a 22.3% share and Apple had 12.9%.
  

    [110]
   


  The market has been dominated by the Android operating system since 2010. Android's market share (measured by units shipment) rose from 33.2% in Q4 2011 to 81.7% of the market in Q4 2016. Apple's market share oscillated between 18% to 12.5% during the same period. Windows Phone market share also oscillated between 1.5% to 0.3% during the same time frame. As of the end of Q4 2016, Android was the most popular operating system sold with new smartphones with an 81.7% market share, followed by iOS with 17.9%, Windows 10 Mobile with 0.3% and other OSes at 0.1%.
  

    [116]
   


  A 2012
  
   University of Southern California
  
  study found that
  
   unprotected
  

   adolescent sexual
  
  activity was more common among owners of smartphones.
  

    [117]
   

  A study conducted by the
  
   Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
  
  's (RPI) Lighting Research Center (LRC) concluded that smartphones, or any backlit devices, can seriously affect
  
   sleep cycles
  
  .
  

    [118]
   

  Some persons might become psychologically attached to cellphones resulting in anxiety when separated from the devices.
  

    [119]
   

  A "
  
   smombie
  
  " (a combination of "smartphone" and "
  
   zombie
  
  ") is a walking person using a smartphone and not paying attention as they walk, possibly risking an accident in the process, an increasing social phenomenon.
  

    [120]
   

  The issue of slow-moving smartphone users led to the temporary creation of a "mobile lane" for walking in
  
   Chongqing
  
  ,
  
   China
  
  .
  

    [121]
   

  The issue of distracted smartphone users led the city of
  
   Augsburg, Germany
  
  to embed pedestrian traffic lights in the pavement.
  

    [122]
   


  Mobile phone use while driving, including talking on the phone, texting, using mapping apps or operating other phone features, is common but controversial. It is widely considered dangerous due to
  
   distracted driving
  
  . Being distracted while operating a motor vehicle has been shown to increase the risk of accidents. In September 2010, the US
  
   National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
  
  (NHTSA) reported that 995 people were killed by
  
   drivers distracted by cell phones
  
  . In March 2011 a US insurance company,
  
   State Farm Insurance
  
  , announced the results of a study which showed 19% of drivers surveyed accessed the Internet on a smartphone while driving.
  

    [123]
   

  Many jurisdictions prohibit the use of mobile phones while driving. In Egypt, Israel, Japan, Portugal and Singapore, both handheld and hands-free use of a mobile phone (which uses a
  
   speakerphone
  
  ) is banned. In other countries including the UK and France and in many
  
   U.S. states
  
  , only handheld phone use is banned, while hands-free use is permitted.
 
  A 2011 study reported that over 90% of college students surveyed text (initiate, reply or read) while driving.
  

    [124]
   

  The scientific literature on the danger of driving while sending a text message from a mobile phone, or
  

    texting while driving
   

  , is limited. A simulation study at the
  
   University of Utah
  
  found a sixfold increase in distraction-related accidents when texting.
  

    [125]
   

  Due to the increasing complexity of smartphones, this has introduced additional difficulties for law enforcement officials when attempting to distinguish one usage from another in drivers using their devices. This is more apparent in countries which ban both handheld and hands-free usage, rather than those which ban handheld use only, as officials cannot easily tell which function of the mobile phone is being used simply by looking at the driver. This can lead to drivers being stopped for using their device illegally for a phone call when, in fact, they were using the device legally, for example, when using the phone's incorporated controls for car stereo,
  
   GPS
  
  or
  
   satnav
  
  .
 
  A 2010 study reviewed the incidence of mobile phone use while
  
   cycling
  
  and its effects on behavior and safety.
  

    [126]
   

  In 2013 a national survey in the US reported the number of drivers who reported using their cellphones to access the Internet while driving had risen to nearly one of four.
  

    [127]
   

  A study conducted by the University of Illinois examined approaches for reducing inappropriate and problematic use of mobile phones, such as using mobile phones while driving.
  

    [128]
   


  Accidents involving a driver being distracted by talking on a mobile phone have begun to be prosecuted as negligence similar to speeding. In the
  
   United Kingdom
  
  , from 27 February 2007, motorists who are caught using a hand-held mobile phone while driving will have three penalty points added to their license in addition to the fine of
  
   £
  
  60.
  

    [129]
   

  This increase was introduced to try to stem the increase in drivers ignoring the law.
  

    [130]
   


   Japan
  
  prohibits all mobile phone use while driving, including use of hands-free devices. New Zealand has banned hand held cellphone use since 1 November 2009. Many states in the United States have banned texting on cell phones while driving. Illinois became the 17th American state to enforce this law.
  

    [131]
   

  As of July 2010, 30 states had banned texting while driving, with Kentucky becoming the most recent addition on July 15.
  

    [132]
   



   Public Health Law Research
  
  maintains a list of distracted driving laws in the United States. This database of laws provides a comprehensive view of the provisions of laws that restrict the use of mobile communication devices while driving for all 50 states and the District of Columbia between 1992, when first law was passed through December 1, 2010. The dataset contains information on 22 dichotomous, continuous or categorical variables including, for example, activities regulated (e.g., texting versus talking, hands-free versus handheld), targeted populations, and exemptions.
  

    [133]
   


  A "patent war" between Samsung and Apple started when the latter claimed that the original
  
   Galaxy S
  
  Android phone copied the interface‍—‌and possibly the hardware‍—‌of Apple's iOS for the
  
   iPhone 3GS
  
  . There was also smartphone patents licensing and litigation involving
  
   Sony Mobile
  
  ,
  
   Google
  
  ,
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  ,
  
   Samsung
  
  ,
  
   Microsoft
  
  ,
  
   Nokia
  
  ,
  
   Motorola
  
  ,
  
   HTC
  
  ,
  
   Huawei
  
  and
  
   ZTE
  
  , among others. The conflict is part of the
  
   wider "patent wars"
  
  between multinational technology and software corporations. To secure and increase
  
   market share
  
  , companies granted a
  
   patent
  
  can sue to prevent competitors from using the methods the patent covers. Since 2010 the number of lawsuits, counter-suits, and trade complaints based on patents and
  
   designs
  
  in the market for smartphones, and devices based on
  
   smartphone OSes
  
  such as
  
   Android
  
  and
  
   iOS
  
  , has increased significantly. Initial suits, countersuits, rulings, license agreements, and other major events began in 2009 as the smartphone market grew more rapidly.
 
  With the rise in number of mobile medical apps in the market place, government regulatory agencies raised concerns on the safety of the use of such applications. These concerns were transformed into regulation initiatives worldwide with the aim of safeguarding users from untrusted medical advice.
  

    [134]
   


  Smartphone malware is easily distributed through an insecure
  
   app store
  
  .
  

    [135]
   



    [136]
   

  Often malware is hidden in
  
   pirated
  
  versions of legitimate apps, which are then distributed through third-party app stores.
  

    [137]
   



    [138]
   

  Malware risk also comes from what's known as an "update attack", where a legitimate application is later changed to include a malware component, which users then install when they are notified that the app has been updated.
  

    [139]
   

  As well, one out of three robberies in 2012 in the United States involved the theft of a mobile phone. An online petition has urged smartphone makers to install
  
   kill switches
  
  in their devices.
  

    [140]
   

  In 2014, Apple's "Find my iPhone" and Google's "Android Device Manager" can disable phones that have been lost/stolen. With BlackBerry Protect in OS version 10.3.2, devices can be rendered unrecoverable to even BlackBerry's own Operating System recovery tools if incorrectly authenticated or dissociated from their account.
  

    [141]
   


  Using smartphones late at night can disturb sleep, due to the brightly lit screen affecting
  
   melatonin
  
  levels and
  
   sleep cycles
  
  . In an effort to alleviate these issues, several apps that change the
  
   color temperature
  
  of a screen to a warmer hue based on the time of day to reduce the amount of blue light generated have been developed for Android, while
  
   iOS 9.3
  
  integrated similar, system-level functionality known as "Night Shift". Amazon released a feature known as "blue shade" in their Fire OS "Bellini" 5.0 and later. It has also been theorized that for some users, addicted use of their phones, especially before they go to bed, can result in "
  
   ego depletion
  
  ". Many people also use their phones as alarm clocks, which can also lead to loss of sleep.
  

    [142]
   



    [143]
   



    [144]
   



    [145]
   



    [146]
   


  Smartphones have presented issues similar to those affecting other mobile phones. As well, there are some issues which are unique to smartphones.
 
  Compared to earlier non-smartphone mobile phones, smartphone battery life has generally been poor, due to the significant power requirements of their computer systems and color screens. Poor smartphone battery life has negatively affected customer satisfaction.
  

    [147]
   



    [148]
   



    [149]
   

  There is also a trend towards using batteries that the user cannot replace.
  

    [150]
   

  Smartphone users have addressed the challenge of limited battery life by purchasing additional chargers for use outside the home, at work, and in cars and by buying portable external "battery packs". External battery packs include generic models which are connected to the smartphone with a cable and custom-made models that "piggyback" onto a smartphone's case. Most recently, Samsung had to recall millions of the Galaxy Note 7 smartphones due to a battery issue.
  

    [151]
   


  "
  
   Phablet
  
  ", a
  
   portmanteau
  
  of the words
  
   phone
  
  and
  
   tablet
  
  , describes smartphones with larger screens.
  

    [152]
   



    [153]
   


  "Superphone" is also used by some companies to market phones with unusually large screens and other expensive features.
  

    [154]
   



    [155]
   


  "Ultra Premium" is a term used to identify a smartphone which has top of the line materials.
  

    [156]
   

