


   WebOS
  
  , also known as
  
   Open WebOS
  
  or
  
   LG WebOS
  
  , (previously known as
  
   HP WebOS
  
  and
  
   Palm WebOS
  
  , stylized as
  
   webOS
  
  )
  

    [2]
   

  is a
  
   Linux kernel
  
  -based multitask
  
   operating system
  
  for
  
   smart devices
  
  such as
  
   Smart TVs
  
  and it has been used as a
  
   mobile operating system
  
  . Initially developed by Palm (which was acquired by
  
   Hewlett-Packard
  
  ), HP made the platform
  
   open source
  
  , at which point it became
  
   Open WebOS.
  
  The operating system was later sold to
  
   LG Electronics
  
  . HP still held many patents related to WebOS. In January 2014,
  
   Qualcomm
  
  announced that it had acquired technology patents from HP, which included all the WebOS patents.
  

    [3]
   


  Various versions of WebOS have been featured on several devices, including
  
   Pre
  
  ,
  
   Pixi
  
  , and
  
   Veer
  

   smartphones
  
  ,
  
   TouchPad
  

   tablet
  
  , LG
  
   Smart TVs
  
  since 2015.
 


  Palm launched WebOS, then called
  
   Palm WebOS
  
  , in January 2009 as the successor to
  
   Palm OS
  
  . The first WebOS device was the original
  
   Palm Pre
  
  , released by
  
   Sprint
  
  in June 2009. The
  
   Palm Pixi
  
  followed. Upgraded "Plus" versions of both Pre and Pixi were released on Verizon and AT&T.
 
  In April 2010 HP acquired Palm; WebOS was described by
  
   Leo Apotheker
  
  as a key asset and motivation for the purchase. The $1.2 billion acquisition finalized in June. HP indicated its intention to develop the WebOS platform for use in multiple new products, including smartphones, tablets, and
  
   printers
  
  .
  

    [4]
   


  In February 2011, HP announced that it would use WebOS as the universal platform for all its devices.
  

    [5]
   

  However, HP also made the decision
  

    [6]
   

  that the Palm Pre, Palm Pixi, and the "Plus" revisions would not receive
  
   over-the-air updates
  
  to WebOS 2.0,
  

    [7]
   

  despite a previous commitment to an upgrade "in coming months."
  

    [8]
   

  HP announced several WebOS devices, including the
  
   HP Veer
  
  and
  
   HP Pre 3
  
  smartphones, running WebOS 2.2, and the
  
   HP TouchPad
  
  , a tablet computer released in July 2011 that runs WebOS 3.0.
 
  In March 2011 HP announced plans for a version of WebOS by the end of 2011 to run within
  
   Windows
  
  ,
  

    [9]
   

  and to be installed on all HP desktop and notebook computers in 2012.
  

    [10]
   

  Neither ever materialized, although work had begun on an x86 port around this time involving a team in
  
   Fort Collins, Colorado
  
  ; work was scrapped later in the year.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  In August 2011 HP announced that it was interested in selling its Personal Systems Group, responsible for all of its consumer PC products, including WebOS, and that WebOS device development and production lines would be halted.
  

    [11]
   



    [12]
   



    [13]
   

  It remained unclear whether HP would consider licensing WebOS software to other manufacturers. When HP reduced the price of the Touchpad to $99, the existing inventory quickly sold out.
  

    [14]
   


  The HP Pre 3 was launched in select areas of Europe, and US-based units were available only through unofficial channels (both AT&T and Verizon canceled their orders just prior to delivery after
  
   Apotheker's
  
  (HP's CEO at the time) announcement.
  

    [15]
   

  Notably, these US Pre 3 units, having been released through unofficial channels, lacked both warranties and carried no support obligation from HP; as a result parts are nearly impossible to come by. HP announced that it would continue to issue updates for the HP Veer and
  
   HP TouchPad
  
  , but these updates have failed to materialize for the former, and the latter saw a final, unofficial release called "WebOS CE" that contained only open-sourced components of WebOS meant for what remained of the developer community rather than a conventional, user-centric update to the operating system. The last HP WebOS version, 3.0.5, was released on 12 January 2012.
 
  In December 2011, after abandoning the TouchPad and the proposed sale of the HP Personal Systems Group, HP announced it would release WebOS
  
   source code
  
  in the near future under an
  
   open-source
  
  license.
  

    [16]
   

  In August 2012, code specific to the existing devices was released as
  
   WebOS Community Edition
  
  (CE), with support for the existing HP hardware.
  

    [17]
   

  Open WebOS includes open source libraries designed to target a wider range of hardware. HP renamed its WebOS unit as "Gram".
  

    [18]
   



    [19]
   


  In February 2012 HP released Isis, a new web browser for Open WebOS.
  

    [20]
   


  The
  
   HP App Catalog
  
  was an
  
   app store
  
  for apps for the mobile devices running WebOS.
 
  On 6 June 2009, WebOS launched on the
  
   Palm Pre
  
  with 18 available apps. The number of apps grew to 30 by 17 June 2009,
  

    [21]
   

  with 1 million cumulative downloads by 27 June 2009;
  

    [22]
   

  30 official and 31 unofficial apps by 13 July 2009;
  

    [23]
   

  1,000 official apps by 1 January 2010;
  

    [24]
   

  4,000 official apps 29 September 2010;
  

    [25]
   

  and 10,002 official apps on 9 December 2011.
  

    [26]
   


  Subsequently, the number of available apps has decreased because many apps have been pulled from the App Catalog by its owners. Examples include the apps for
  

    The New York Times
   

  and
  
   Pandora Radio
  
  . The number of remaining functional apps was unknown. When factoring out abandoned and/or non-functioning apps that remain in the App Catalog at present, the number is projected to be substantially lower. WebOS users lost HP App Catalog access after the 15 March 2015 shutdown of the HP App Catalog servers; this was notified by a Catalog splash screen on 11 November 2014.
  

    [27]
   


  On 25 February 2013, HP announced that it was licensing WebOS to
  
   LG Electronics
  
  for use on its web-enabled smart TVs. Under the agreement LG Electronics is allowed unlimited access to the documentation, source code, developers and all related websites.
  
   LG Electronics
  
  licensed WebOS from
  
   HP
  
  to enhance its
  
   smart TVs
  
  , replacing its previous NetCast platform.
  

    [28]
   



    [29]
   

  However, HP will still hold on to patents underlying WebOS as well as cloud-based services such as the App Catalog.
  

    [30]
   

  As well as its use as an OS for smart TVs, LG has expanded its use to various IoT devices. As a starting point, LG showcased an LG Wearable Platform OS (WebOS) smartwatch in early 2015.
  

    [31]
   


  The WebOS mobile platform introduced some innovative features, such as the cards interface, that are still in use by
  
   Apple
  
  ,
  
   Microsoft
  
  and
  
   Google
  
  on their mobile operating systems
  
   iOS
  
  ,
  
   Windows Phone
  
  , and
  
   Android
  
  , respectively.
 
  Navigation uses
  
   multi-touch
  

   gestures
  
  on the
  
   touchscreen
  
  . The interface uses "cards" to manage
  
   multitasking
  
  and represent apps. The user switches between running apps with a flick from left and right on the screen. Apps are closed by flicking a "card" up—and "off"—the screen. The app "cards" can be rearranged for organization. WebOS 2.0 introduced 'stacks', where related cards could be "stacked" together.
 
  Palm referred to integration of information from many sources as "Synergy." Users can sign into multiple email accounts from different providers and integrate all of these sources into a single list. Similar capabilities pull together calendars and also
  
   instant messages
  
  and
  
   SMS
  
  text messages from multiple sources.
  

    [38]
   


  The OS can be updated without docking to a PC, instead receiving OS updates over the carrier connection.
 
  The notification area is located on the bottom portion of the screen on phones, and on the top status bar area on tablets.
 
  On phones, when a notification comes in, it slides in from the bottom of the screen. Due to the resizable nature of the Mojo and Enyo application frameworks, the app usually resizes itself to allow unhindered use while the notification is displayed. After the notification slides away, it usually remains as an icon. The user can then tap on the icons to expand them. Notifications can then be dismissed (sliding off the screen), acted upon (tapping), or left alone.
 
  By default, data sync uses a
  
   cloud-based
  
  approach rather than using a desktop
  
   sync
  
  client. The first version of WebOS shipped with the ability to sync with Apple's iTunes software by masquerading as an Apple device, but this feature was disabled by subsequent iTunes software updates.
 
  On HP WebOS, officially vetted third-party apps are accessible to be installed on the device from the HP App Catalog.
  

    [39]
   


  As HP WebOS replaced
  
   Palm OS
  
  , Palm commissioned MotionApps to code and develop an
  
   emulator
  
  called Classic, to enable backward compatibility to Palm OS apps. This operates with WebOS version 1.0. Palm OS emulation was discontinued in WebOS version 2.0.
  

    [40]
   

  MotionApps disengaged from Classic in 2010, citing HP Palm as "disruptive."
  

    [41]
   


  Another source of
  
   applications
  
  is
  
   homebrew software
  
  .
  

    [42]
   



    [43]
   

  Homebrew apps are not directly supported by HP. Programs used to distribute homebrew WebOS apps include WebOS Quick Install (Java-based for Desktop computers), and Preware (a
  
   homebrew
  
  WebOS app catalog, which must be sideloaded to install). If software problems do occur after installing homebrew programs, "WebOS Doctor" (provided by HP) can restore a phone back to factory settings and remove changes made by homebrew apps and patches.
  

    [44]
   


  LG has redesigned the UI of WebOS, whilst maintaining the card UI as a feature called "Simple switching" between the TV apps. The other two features promoted by the company are simple connection (using an animated
  
   Clippy
  
  -like character called Beanbird to aid the user through setup), and simple discovery.
 
  Underneath the
  
   graphical user interface
  
  , WebOS has much in common with mainstream
  
   Linux distributions
  
  . Versions 1.0 to 2.1 use a patched Linux 2.6.24
  
   kernel
  
  .
  

    [45]
   


  The list of open-source components used by the different releases of WebOS, as well as the source code of and patches applied to each component, is available at the Palm Open Source webpage.
  

    [45]
   

  This page also serves as a reference listing of the versions of WebOS that have been publicly released.
 
  In 2011,
  
   Enyo
  
  replaced Mojo, released in June 2009, as the
  
   software development kit
  
  (SDK).
  

    [46]
   

