



       Sony Exmor RS
      



       [11]
      



       [12]
      



       [13]
      


  The
  
   iPhone 6
  
  and
  
   iPhone 6 Plus
  
  are
  
   smartphones
  
  designed and marketed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  The devices are part of the
  
   iPhone
  
  series and were announced on September 9, 2014, and released on September 19, 2014.
  

    [17]
   

  The iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus jointly serve as successors to the
  
   iPhone 5S
  
  and were themselves replaced as flagship devices of the
  
   iPhone
  
  series by the
  
   iPhone 6S
  
  and
  
   iPhone 6S Plus
  
  on September 9, 2015.
 
  The iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus include larger 4.7 and 5.5 inches (120 and 140 mm) displays, a faster processor, upgraded cameras, improved
  
   LTE
  
  and
  
   Wi-Fi
  
  connectivity and support for a
  
   near field communications
  
  -based
  
   mobile payments
  
  offering.
  

    [18]
   



    [19]
   


  The iPhone 6 and 6 Plus received positive reviews, with critics regarding their improved design, specifications, camera, and battery life as being improvements over previous iPhone models. However, aspects of the design of iPhone 6 were also panned, including plastic strips on the rear of the device for its antenna that disrupted the otherwise metal exterior, and the screen resolution of the standard-sized iPhone 6 being lower than other devices in its class. Pre-orders of the iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus exceeded four million within its first 24 hours of availability—an Apple record.
  

    [20]
   

  More than ten million iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus devices were sold in the first three days, another Apple record.
  

    [21]
   


  Despite their positive reception, the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus have been the subject of several hardware issues, including most prominently, being susceptible to bending under pressure (a design flaw nicknamed "Bendgate"), and as a byproduct of this lack of rigidity, the touchscreen's internal hardware being susceptible to losing its connection to the phone's
  
   logic board
  
  (nicknamed "Touch Disease"). The iPhone 6 Plus was also the subject of camera issues, including some devices with malfunctioning
  
   optical image stabilization
  
  or otherwise defects on rear cameras.
 
  The iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus were moved to the midrange spot in Apple's iPhone lineup when the iPhone 6S and 6S Plus were released in September 2015. The iPhone 6 and 6 Plus were discontinued on September 7, 2016 when Apple announced the
  
   iPhone 7
  
  and
  
   iPhone 7 Plus
  
  . Their spot as the entry-level iPhone was replaced by the
  
   iPhone SE
  
  , which was released earlier on March 31, 2016.
 


  From the launch of the
  
   original iPhone
  
  to the
  
   iPhone 4S
  
  , iPhones have used 3.5-inch displays—which are smaller than screens used by flagship phones from competitors. The
  
   iPhone 5
  
  and its immediate successors featured a display that was taller, but the same width as prior models, measuring at 4 inches diagonally. Following Apple's loss in smartphone market share to companies producing phones with larger displays, reports as early as January 2014 suggested that Apple was preparing to launch new iPhone models with larger, 4.7-inch and 5.5-inch displays.
  

    [22]
   



    [23]
   



    [24]
   

  Reports prior to its unveiling also speculated that Apple might use a new iPhone model to introduce a
  
   mobile payments
  
  platform using
  
   near-field communications
  
  —a technology that has been incorporated into many
  
   Android
  
  phones, but has experienced a low adoption rate among users.
  

    [25]
   


  The iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus were officially unveiled during a press event at the Flint Center for Performing Arts in
  
   Cupertino, California
  
  on September 9, 2014 and released on September 19, 2014; pre-orders began on September 12, 2014, with the iPhone 6 starting at US$649 and the iPhone 6 Plus starting at US$749.
  

    [26]
   

  In China, where the iPhone 5c and 5s were the first models in the iPhone series to be released in the country on the same day as their international launch, Apple notified local wireless carriers that it would be unable to release the iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus on the 19th because there were "details which are not ready"; local media reported that the devices had not yet been approved by the
  
   Ministry of Industry and Information Technology
  
  , and earlier in the year, a news report by state broadcaster
  
   China Central Television
  
  alleged that iPhone devices were a threat to national security because iOS 7's "frequent locations" function could expose "state secrets."
  

    [27]
   



    [28]
   


  In August 2015, Apple admitted that some iPhone 6 Plus may have faulty cameras that could be causing photos to look blurry and initiated a replacement program.
  

    [29]
   



    [30]
   



    [31]
   


  On September 9, 2015, with the release of the
  
   iPhone 6S
  
  and
  
   iPhone 6S Plus
  
  , the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus were moved to the mid-range of the iPhone lineup. The 128GB versions of the iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus was discontinued along with the gold version of both phones, but the 16GB and 64GB versions of the iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus in silver and space gray remain available for sale at a reduced price.
  

    [32]
   


  In June 2016, Apple faced a potential sales ban in China, as Shenzhen Baili, a Chinese device maker, alleged that the iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus infringed on its design patent.
  

    [33]
   


  The iPhone 6 and 6 Plus were entirely discontinued on September 7, 2016, when Apple announced the
  
   iPhone 7
  
  and
  
   iPhone 7 Plus
  
  , and the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus's spot as the entry-level iPhone has since been taken by the
  
   iPhone SE
  
  . As the iPhone SE has more powerful internal hardware than the midrange iPhone 6 (largely the same as the 6S) and had been released earlier on March 31, 2016, this created an unusual situation when it was sold alongside the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus until September 7 despite being marketed as a lower-tier iPhone.
 
  The design of the iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus are influenced by that of the
  
   iPad Air
  
  with a glass front that is curved around the edges of the display, and an aluminum rear that contains two plastic strips for the antenna.
  

    [34]
   

  Both models come in gold, silver, and "space gray" finishes. The iPhone 6 has a thickness of 6.9 millimetres (0.27 in), while the iPhone 6 Plus is 7.1 mm (0.28 in) in thickness; both are thinner than the iPhone 5c and iPhone 5s, with the iPhone 6 being Apple's thinnest phone to date. The most significant changes to the iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus are its displays; both branded as "
  
   Retina HD Display
  
  " and "ion-strengthened", the iPhone 6 display is 4.7 inches in size with a
  
   16:9
  
  resolution of 1334x750 (326
  
   ppi
  
  , minus one row of pixels), while the iPhone 6 Plus includes a 5.5-inch 1920x1080 (
  
   1080p
  
  ) display (401 PPI). The displays use a multiple-domain LCD panel, dubbed "dual-domain pixels"; the RGB pixels themselves are skewed in pattern, so that every pixel is seen from a different angle. This technique helps improve the viewing angles of the display.
  

    [35]
   


  To accommodate the larger physical size of the iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus, the power button was moved to the side of the phone instead of the top to improve its accessibility.
  

    [18]
   



    [19]
   

  The iPhone 6 features a 6.91 Wh (1810 mAh) battery, while the iPhone 6 Plus features an 11.1 Wh (2915 mAh) battery. Unlike the previous model, the rear-facing camera is not flush with the rear of the device, and has a slight "bulge" around the lens.
  

    [36]
   


  Both models include an
  
   Apple A8
  

   system-on-chip
  
  , and an
  
   M8
  
  motion co-processor—an update of the
  
   M7
  
  chip from the iPhone 5s. The primary difference between the M8 and the original M7 coprocessor is that the M8 also includes a barometer to measure altitude changes.
  
   Phil Schiller
  
  touted that the A8 chip would provide, in comparison to the 5s, a 25% increase in CPU performance, a 50% increase in graphics performance, and less heat output. Early hands-on reports suggested that the A8's GPU performance might indeed break away from previous generations doubling of performance at each yearly release, scoring 21204.26 in Base mark X compared to 20253.80, 10973.36 and 5034.75 on respectively the 5s, 5 and 4s.
  

    [37]
   


  The expanded
  
   LTE
  
  connectivity on the iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus is improved to
  
   LTE Advanced
  
  , with support for over 20 LTE bands (7 more than the
  
   iPhone 5s
  
  ),
  

    [38]
   

  for up to 150 Mbit/s download speed, and
  
   VoLTE
  
  support.
  
   Wi-Fi
  
  performance has been improved with support for
  
   802.11ac
  
  specifications, providing speeds up to 433.0581 Mbit/s—which is up to 3 times faster than
  
   802.11n
  
  ,
  

    [38]
   

  along with
  
   Wi-Fi Calling
  
  support where available. The iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus add support for
  
   near-field communications
  
  (NFC), which is used exclusively for
  
   Apple Pay
  
  —a new
  
   mobile payments
  
  system which will allow users to store their credit cards in
  
   Passbook
  
  for use with online payments and retail purchases over NFC.
  

    [39]
   

  NFC support is restricted to Apple Pay only, and cannot be used for any other purposes (such as sharing content with other iPhone users).
  

    [40]
   


  The iPhone 6's rear-facing camera now has the ability to shoot 1080p video at either 30 or 60 frames per second and slow-motion video at either 120 or 240 frames per second. The camera also includes
  
   phase detection autofocus
  
  .
  

    [41]
   

  It can also record . The iPhone 6 Plus camera is nearly identical, but also includes
  
   optical image stabilization
  
  .
  

    [18]
   



    [19]
   

  The front-facing camera was also updated with a new sensor and f/2.2 aperture, along with support for burst and HDR modes.
  

    [18]
   



    [19]
   


  When first released, the iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus were supplied pre-loaded with
  
   iOS 8
  
  , while the
  
   iPhone 5S
  
  was supplied pre-loaded with
  
   iOS 7
  
  . Apps are able to take advantage of the increased screen size in the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus to display more information on-screen; for example, the Mail app uses a dual-pane layout similar to its
  
   iPad
  
  version when the device is in
  
   landscape mode
  
  on the iPhone 6 Plus. As it uses an identical aspect ratio, apps designed for the
  
   iPhone 5
  
  , iPhone 5C, and 5S can be upscaled for use on the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus. To improve the usability of the devices' larger screens, an additional "Reachability" gesture was added; double-tapping the Home button will slide the top half of the screen's contents down to the bottom half of the screen. This function allows users to reach buttons located near the top of the screen, such as a "Back" button in the top-left corner.
  

    [18]
   



    [19]
   


  Both iPhone 6 models received generally positive reviews.
  

    Re/code
   

  called it "the best smartphone you can buy".
  

    [42]
   



    TechRadar
   

  praised the iPhone 6's "brilliant" design, improved battery life over the 5s, iOS 8 for being "smarter and more intuitive than ever", along with the quality of its camera. However, the plastic antenna strips on the rear of the phone were criticized for resulting in poor aesthetics, the display for having lower resolution and pixel density in comparison to other recent smartphones – including those with the same physical screen size as the iPhone 6, such as the
  
   HTC One
  
  , and for not having a sufficient justification for its significantly higher price in comparison to similar devices running
  
   Android
  
  or
  
   Windows Phone
  
  .
  

    [43]
   



    The Verge
   

  considered the iPhone 6 to be "simply and cleanly designed" in comparison to the 5s, noting that the phone still felt usable despite its larger size, but criticized the antenna plastic, the protruding camera lens (which prevents the device from sitting flat without a case), and the lack of additional optimization in the operating system for the bigger screen. Improvements such as performance, battery life,
  
   VoLTE
  
  support, and other tweaks were also noted. In conclusion, the iPhone 6 was considered "good, even great, but there’s little about it that’s truly ambitious or truly moving the needle. It’s just a refinement of a lot of existing ideas into a much more pleasant package".
  

    [34]
   


  In regards to the 6 Plus,
  

    Engadget
   

  panned its design for being uncomfortable to hold and harder to grip in comparison to other devices such as the
  
   Galaxy Note 3
  
  and
  
   LG G3
  
  , but praised its inclusion of optical image stabilization and slightly better battery life than the 6.
  

    [41]
   


  The iPhone 6 and 6 Plus were affected by a number of notable hardware-related issues, including but not limited to concerns surrounding their rigidity (which led to incidents surrounding chassis bending, as well as degradation or outright loss of touchscreen functionality), performance issues on models with larger storage capacity, camera problems on the 6 Plus model, as well as an initially undocumented "error 53" that appeared under certain circumstances.
 
  Shortly after its public release, it was reported that the iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus chassis was susceptible to bending under pressure, such as when carried tightly in a user's pocket. While such issues are not exclusive to the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus, the design flaw came to be known among users and the media as "
  
   Bendgate
  
  ".
  

    [44]
   



    [45]
   


  Apple responded to the bending allegations, stating that they had only received nine complaints of bent devices, and that the damage occurring due to regular use is "extremely rare." The company maintained that the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus went through durability testing to ensure they would stand up to daily use.
  

    [46]
   

  The company offered to replace phones that were bent, if it is determined that the bending was unintentional.
  

    [44]
   


  On October 1, 2014, it was reported by Axel Telzerowm, editor-in-chief of the
  
   German
  
  technology magazine
  

    Computer Bild
   

  , that following the posting of a video where a presenter was able to bend an iPhone 6 Plus, an Apple Germany representative informed the publication that it had been banned from future Apple events and that it would no longer receive devices directly from Apple for testing. Telzerowm responded by saying that "we congratulate you to your fine new generation of iPhones, even if one of them has a minor weakness with its casing. But we are deeply disappointed about the lack of respect of your company."
  

    [47]
   


  On October 3, 2014
  
   9to5Mac
  
  released a post claiming that certain iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus users complained on social networking sites that the phone ripped off their hair when they held the phone close to their ears when making phone calls.
  

    [48]
   


   Twitter
  
  users claimed that the seam between the glass screen and aluminum back of the iPhone 6 is to blame, with hair becoming caught within it.
  

    [49]
   



    [50]
   


  Some users reported that 64 and 128 GB iPhone 6 models had experienced performance issues, and that some 128 GB iPhone 6 Plus models would, in rare cases, randomly crash and reboot.
  
   Business Korea
  
  reported that the issues were connected to the
  
   triple-layer cell
  

   NAND
  
  storage of the affected models. Triple-layer cells can store three bits of data per cell of flash, and are cheaper than dual-layer cell solutions, but at the cost of performance. It was reported that Apple had planned to switch the affected model lines back to multi-layer cell flash, and address the performance issues on existing devices in a future iOS update.
  

    [51]
   



    [52]
   



    [53]
   


  It was reported that the optical image stabilization systems on some iPhone 6 Plus models were faulty, failing to properly stabilize when the phone is being held perfectly still, leading to blurry photos and "wavy"-looking videos.
  

    [54]
   

  The optical image stabilization system was also found to have been affected by accessories that use magnets, such as third-party lens attachments; Apple issued advisories to users and its licensed accessory makers, warning that magnetic or metallic accessories can cause the OIS to malfunction.
  

    [55]
   


  On August 21, 2015, Apple instituted a repair program for iPhone 6 Plus models released between September 2014 and January 2015, citing that faulty rear cameras on affected models may produce blurry pictures.
  

    [29]
   



    [30]
   



    [31]
   


  Some iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus models have an issue where the front facing camera is somehow "shifted", or out of place. Apple stated that they would replace most iPhone 6's with this issue, free of charge. Despite numerous complaints regarding this issue, it does not seem to actually affect the camera itself. It is said that the camera is not what has shifted, but a piece of protective foam around the camera module itself that has gone out of place.
  

    [56]
   


  If the iPhone 6 home button is repaired or modified by a third-party, the device will fail security checks related to Touch ID as the components had not been "re-validated" for security reasons—a process which can only be performed by an authorized Apple outlet. Failing these checks disables all features related to Touch ID. Such effects have sometimes happened as a result of damage as well.
  

    [57]
   



    [58]
   


  It was reported these same hardware integrity checks would trigger an
  
   unrecoverable
  
  loop into "Recovery Mode" if iOS is updated or restored, with attempts to restore the device via
  
   iTunes
  
  software resulting in an "error 53" message. Beyond the explanation that this is related to hardware integrity errors regarding Touch ID components, Apple provided no official explanation of what specifically triggers error 53 or how it can be fixed without replacing the entire device.
  

    [57]
   



    [58]
   


  On February 18, 2016, Apple released an iOS 9.2.1 patch through iTunes which addresses this issue, and admitted that error 53 was actually related to a diagnostic check for inspecting the Touch ID hardware before an iPhone is shipped from its factories.
  

    [59]
   


  Touchscreen control components on iPhone 6
  
   logic boards
  
  have insufficient support, including a lack of underfill—which strengthens and stabilizes
  
   integrated circuits
  
  , and a lack of rigid metal
  
   shielding
  
  on the logic board unlike previous iPhone models; the touchscreen controller is instead shielded by a flexible "sticker". Normal use of the device can cause the logic board to flex internally, which strains the touchscreen IC connectors and leads to a degradation or outright loss of touchscreen functionality. A symptom that has been associated with this type of failure is a flickering grey bar near the top of the display.
  

    [60]
   



    [61]
   


   iFixit
  
  reported that this issue, nicknamed "
  
   touch disease
  
  ",
  

    [60]
   



    [62]
   



    [63]
   

  was a byproduct of the previous "Bendgate" design flaw because of the device's demonstrated lack of rigidity. As such, the larger iPhone 6 Plus is more susceptible to the flaw, but it has also been reported on a small percentage of iPhone 6 models.
  

    [63]
   



    [64]
   



    [65]
   

  The devices' successor, the
  
   iPhone 6S
  
  , is not afflicted by this flaw due to changes to their internal design, which included the strengthening of "key points" in the rear casing, and the re-location of the touchscreen controllers to the display assembly from the logic board.
  

    [64]
   


  Initially, Apple did not officially acknowledge this issue. The issue was widely discussed on Apple's support forum—where posts discussing the issue have been subject to
  
   censorship
  
  .
  

    [61]
   

  The touchscreen can be repaired via
  
   microsoldering
  
  :
  
   Apple Stores
  
  are not equipped with the tools needed to perform the logic board repair, which had led to affected users sending their devices to unofficial, third-party repair services. An Apple Store employee interviewed by
  
   Apple Insider
  
  reported that six months after they first started noticing the problem, Apple had issued guidance instructing them to tell affected users that this was a hardware issue which could not be repaired, and that their iPhone had to be replaced. However, some in-stock units have also been afflicted with this issue out of the box, leading to an employee stating that they were "tired of pulling service stock out of the box, and seeing the exact same problem that the customer has on the replacement".
  

    [65]
   



    [66]
   

  The issue received mainstream attention in August 2016 when it was reported upon by iFixit.
  

    [60]
   



    [63]
   



    [65]
   

  On August 26, 2016,
  
   Apple Insider
  
  reported that based on data from four "high-traffic" Apple Store locations, there was a spike in the number of iPhone 6 devices brought into them for repairs following mainstream reports of the "touch disease" problem.
  

    [66]
   


  On August 30, 2016, a group of three iPhone 6 owners sued Apple Inc. in the
  
   United States District Court for the Northern District of California
  
  and filed for a proposed
  
   class action lawsuit
  
  , alleging that Apple was engaging in unfair business practices by having "long been aware" of the defective design, yet actively refusing to acknowledge or repair it.
  

    [62]
   



    [67]
   



    [68]
   


  On November 17, 2016, Apple officially acknowledged the issue and announced a paid repair program for affected iPhone 6 Plus models, stating that "some iPhone 6 Plus devices may exhibit display flickering or Multi-Touch issues after being dropped multiple times on a hard surface and then incurring further stress on the device".
  

    [69]
   


  Apple Inc. announced that, within 24 hours of availability, over 4 million pre-orders of the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus were made, exceeding the supply available.
  

    [70]
   

  More than 10 million iPhone 6 and iPhone 6 Plus devices were sold in the first three days.
  

    [71]
   



