


   Windows 95
  
  (
  
   codenamed
  


    Chicago
   

  ) is a consumer-oriented
  
   operating system
  
  developed by
  
   Microsoft
  
  . It was released on August 24, 1995,
  

    [4]
   



    [5]
   

  and was a significant improvement over the company's previous
  
   DOS
  
  -based
  
   Windows
  
  products.
 
  Windows 95 merged Microsoft's formerly separate
  
   MS-DOS
  
  and Windows products. It featured significant improvements over its predecessor,
  
   Windows 3.1
  
  , most notably in the
  
   graphical user interface
  
  (GUI) and in its simplified "
  
   plug-and-play
  
  " features. There were also major changes made to the core components of the operating system, such as moving from a mainly
  
   co-operatively multitasked
  

   16-bit
  
  architecture to a
  
   preemptively
  

   multitasked
  

   32-bit
  
  architecture.
 
  Accompanied by an extensive marketing campaign,
  

    [6]
   

  Windows 95 introduced numerous functions and features that were featured in later Windows versions, such as the taskbar, the "Start" button and the way the user navigates. It was also suggested that Windows 95 had an effect of driving other major players (including
  
   OS/2
  
  ) out of business, something which would later be used in court against Microsoft.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  Three years after its introduction, Windows 95 was succeeded by
  
   Windows 98
  
  . Microsoft ended support for Windows 95 on December 31, 2001.
 


  The initial design and planning of Windows 95 can be traced back to around March 1992,
  

    [7]
   



    [8]
   



    [9]
   

  just after the release of
  
   Windows 3.1
  
  . At this time,
  
   Windows for Workgroups 3.11
  
  and
  
   Windows NT 3.1
  
  were still in development and Microsoft's plan for the future was focused on
  
   Cairo
  
  . Cairo would be Microsoft's next-generation operating system based on Windows NT and featuring a new user interface and an object-based file system, but it was not planned to be shipped before 1994. However, Cairo would partially ship in July 1996 in the form of
  
   Windows NT 4.0
  
  , but without the object-based file system, which would later evolve into
  
   WinFS
  
  .
 
  Simultaneously with Windows 3.1's release,
  
   IBM
  
  started shipping
  
   OS/2 2.0
  
  . Microsoft realized they were in need of an updated version of Windows that could support 32-bit applications and preemptive multitasking, but could still run on low-end hardware (Windows NT did not). So the development of Windows "Chicago" was started and, as it was planned for a late 1993 release, became known as Windows 93. Initially, the decision was made not to include a new user interface, as this was planned for Cairo, and only focus on making installation, configuration, and networking easier. Windows 93 would ship together with MS-DOS 7.0, offering a more integrated experience to the user and making it pointless for other companies to create DOS clones. MS-DOS 7.0 was in development at that time under the code name "Jaguar" and could optionally run on top of a Windows 3.1-based 32-bit protected mode kernel called "Cougar" in order to better compete with
  
   DR-DOS
  
  . The first version of Chicago's feature specification was finished on September 30, 1992. Cougar was to become Chicago's kernel.
 
  Prior to Windows 95's official release, users in the
  
   United States
  
  had an opportunity to preview it in the Windows 95 Preview Program. For US$19.95, users would receive several 3.5-inch floppy disks that would be used to install Windows 95 either as an upgrade from Windows 3.1x or as a fresh installation. Participants were also given a free preview of
  
   The Microsoft Network (MSN)
  
  , the
  
   online service
  
  that Microsoft launched with Windows 95. During the preview period, Microsoft established various electronic distribution points for promotional and technical documentation on Chicago,
  

    [10]
   

  including a detailed document for media reviewers describing the new system highlights.
  

    [10]
   



    [11]
   

  The preview versions expired in November 1995, after which the user would have to purchase their own copy of the final version of Windows 95.
 
  Windows 95 was designed to be maximally compatible with existing
  
   MS-DOS
  
  and 16-bit Windows programs and
  
   device drivers
  
  , while offering a more stable and better performing system.
  

    [12]
   



    [13]
   

  The Windows 95 architecture is an evolution of
  
   Windows for Workgroups
  
  ' 386 enhanced mode. The lowest level of the operating system consists of a large number of
  

    virtual device drivers
   

  (VxDs) running in 32-bit
  
   protected mode
  
  and one or more
  
   virtual DOS machines
  
  running in
  
   virtual 8086 mode
  
  . The virtual device drivers are responsible for handling physical devices (such as video and network cards), emulating virtual devices used by the virtual machines or providing various system services. The three most important virtual device drivers are:
 
  Access requests to physical media are sent to
  
   Input/Output Supervisor
  
  , a component responsible for scheduling the requests. Each physical media has its own device driver: access to the disk is performed by a
  
   port driver
  
  , while access to a
  
   SCSI
  
  device is handled by a
  

    miniport
   

  driver working atop the SCSI layer. Port and miniport drivers perform I/O operations in 32-bit protected mode, bypassing
  
   MS-DOS
  
  and
  
   BIOS
  
  , giving a significant performance improvement. In case there is no native Windows driver for a certain storage device, or if a device is forced to run in compatibility mode, the
  
   Real Mode Mapper
  
  can access it through MS-DOS.
 
  32-bit Windows programs are assigned their own memory segments, which can be adjusted to any desired size. Memory area outside the segment cannot be accessed by a program. If a program crashes, nothing else is harmed. Before this, programs used fixed non-exclusive 64 KB segments. While the 64 KB size was a serious handicap in DOS and Windows 3.x, lack of guarantee of exclusiveness was the cause of stability issues because programs sometimes overwrote each other's segments. A crashing Windows 3.x program could knock out surrounding processes.
 
  The
  
   Win32 API
  
  is implemented by three modules, each consisting of a 16-bit and a 32-bit component:
 
  To end-users, MS-DOS appears as an underlying component of Windows 95. For example, it is possible to prevent loading the graphical user interface and boot the system into a real-mode MS-DOS environment. This sparked debate amongst users and professionals over the question of to what extent Windows 95 is an operating system or merely a graphical shell running on top of MS-DOS.
  

    [14]
   



    [15]
   



    [16]
   


  When the graphical user interface is started, the virtual machine manager takes over the filesystem-related and disk-related functionality. MS-DOS itself is demoted to a compatibility layer for 16-bit device drivers.
  

    [17]
   

  This contrasts with earlier versions of Windows which rely on MS-DOS to perform file and disk access (Windows for Workgroups 3.11 could also largely bypass MS-DOS when
  
   32-bit file access
  
  and
  
   32-bit disk access
  
  were enabled). Keeping MS-DOS in memory allows Windows 95 to use DOS device drivers when suitable Windows drivers are unavailable. Windows 95 is capable of using all 16-bit Windows 3.x drivers.
 
  Unlike Windows 3.1x, DOS programs running in Windows 95 do not need DOS drivers for the mouse, CD-ROM and sound card; Windows drivers are used instead.
  
   HIMEM.SYS
  
  is still required to boot Windows 95.
  
   EMM386
  
  and other memory managers, however, are only used by legacy DOS programs. In addition,
  
   CONFIG.SYS
  
  and
  
   AUTOEXEC.BAT
  
  settings (aside from HIMEM.SYS) have no effect on Windows programs. DOS games, which could not be executed on Windows 3.x, can run inside Windows 95 (games tended to lock up Windows 3.x or cause other problems). As with Windows 3.x, DOS programs that use
  
   EGA
  
  or
  
   VGA
  
  graphics modes run in windowed mode (
  
   CGA
  
  and
  
   text mode
  
  programs can continue to run).
 
  On startup, the MS-DOS component in Windows 95 responds to a pressed
  
   F8
  
  key by temporarily pausing the default boot process and presenting the DOS boot options menu, allowing the user to continue starting Windows normally, start Windows in
  
   safe mode
  
  or exit to the DOS prompt.
  

    [14]
   

  As in previous versions of
  
   MS-DOS
  
  , there is no 32-bit support and DOS drivers must be loaded for mice and other hardware.
 
  As a consequence of being DOS-based, Windows 95 has to keep internal DOS data structures synchronized with those of Windows 95. When starting a program, even a native 32-bit Windows program, MS-DOS momentarily executes to create a data structure known as the
  
   Program Segment Prefix
  
  . It is even possible for MS-DOS to run out of
  
   conventional memory
  
  while doing so, preventing the program from launching.
  

    [14]
   

  Windows 3.x allocated
  
   fixed
  
  segments in conventional memory first. Since the segments were allocated as fixed, Windows could not move them, which would prevent any more programs from launching.
 
  Microsoft partially removed support for
  
   File Control Blocks
  
  (an API hold-over of DOS 1.x and CP/M) in Windows 95 OSR2 (
  
   OEM
  
  Service Release 2). FCB functions can only read
  
   FAT32
  
  volumes, but not write to them.
 
  Windows 95 introduced a redesigned
  
   shell
  
  based around a
  
   desktop metaphor
  
  ; the desktop was re-purposed to hold shortcuts to applications, files and folders. By contrast,
  
   Windows 3.1
  
  's desktop was used to display icons of running applications. In Windows 95, they were now displayed as buttons on a
  
   taskbar
  
  across the bottom of the screen, which also contained a notification area used to display icons for background applications, a volume control and the current time. The
  
   Start menu
  
  , invoked by clicking the "Start" button on the taskbar, was introduced as an additional means of launching applications or opening documents. While maintaining the program groups used by its predecessor
  
   Program Manager
  
  , it now displayed applications within cascading sub-menus. The previous
  
   File Manager
  
  program was also replaced by
  
   Windows Explorer
  
  .
 
  In 1994, Microsoft designers
  
   Mark Malamud
  
  and
  
   Erik Gavriluk
  
  approached
  
   Brian Eno
  
  to compose music for the Windows 95 project.
  

    [18]
   

  The result was the six-second start-up music-sound of the Windows 95 operating system,
  

    The Microsoft Sound
   

  .
  

    [19]
   


  When released for Windows 95 and NT4,
  
   Internet Explorer 4
  
  came with an optional
  
   Windows Desktop Update
  
  , which modified the shell to provide new features integrated with Internet Explorer, such as
  
   Active Desktop
  
  (which allowed Internet content to be displayed directly on the desktop) and additional updates to Windows Explorer.
 
  Some of the user interface elements introduced in Windows 95, such as the desktop, taskbar, Start menu and Windows Explorer file manager, remained fundamentally unchanged on future versions of Windows.
 
  Windows 95 included support for 255-character mixed-case
  
   long filenames
  


    [20]
   

  and
  
   preemptively
  
  multitasked protected-mode 32-bit applications.
 

   32-bit File Access
  
  is necessary for the
  
   long file names
  
  feature introduced with Windows 95 through the use of the
  
   VFAT
  
  file system extension. It is available to both Windows programs and MS-DOS programs started from Windows (they have to be adapted slightly, since accessing long file names requires using larger
  
   pathname
  

   buffers
  
  and hence different
  
   system calls
  
  ). Competing DOS-compatible operating systems released before Windows 95 cannot see these names. Using older versions of DOS utilities to manipulate files means that the long names are not visible and are lost if files are moved or renamed, as well as by the copy (but not the original), if the file is copied. During a Windows 95 automatic upgrade of an older Windows 3.1 system, DOS and third-party disk utilities which can destroy long file names are identified and made unavailable. When Windows 95 is started in DOS mode, e.g. for running DOS programs, low-level access to disks is locked out. In case the need arises to depend on disk utilities that do not recognize long file names, such as the MS-DOS 6.x's defrag utility, a program called LFNBACK for backup and restoration of long file names is provided on the CD-ROM, specifically in its \ADMIN\APPTOOLS\LFNBACK directory.
 
  Windows 95 followed
  
   Windows for Workgroups
  
  3.11 with its lack of support for older, 16-bit
  
   x86
  
  processors, thus requiring an
  
   Intel 80386
  
  (or compatible). While the OS kernel is 32-bit, much code (especially for the user interface) remained 16-bit for performance reasons as well as development time constraints. This had a rather detrimental effect on system stability and led to frequent application crashes.
 
  The introduction of
  
   32-bit File Access
  
  in Windows for Workgroups 3.11 meant that 16-bit real mode MS-DOS is not used for managing the files while Windows is running, and the earlier introduction of the
  
   32-bit Disk Access
  
  means that the PC
  
   BIOS
  
  is often no longer used for managing hard disks. DOS can be used for running old-style
  
   drivers
  
  for compatibility, but Microsoft discourages using them, as this prevents proper multitasking and impairs system stability.
  
   Control Panel
  
  allows a user to see which MS-DOS components are used by the system; optimal performance is achieved when they are bypassed. The Windows
  
   kernel
  
  uses MS-DOS style real-mode drivers in
  

    Safe Mode
   

  , which exists to allow a user to fix problems relating to loading native, protected-mode drivers.
 
  Official system requirements were an
  
   Intel 80386DX
  
  CPU of any speed, 4 MB of system RAM and 50–55 MB of hard disk space depending on features selected. These minimal claims were made in order to maximize the available market of Windows 3.1 migrations. This configuration would rely heavily on
  
   virtual memory
  
  and was only optimal for productive use on single-tasking dedicated workstations.
  

    [21]
   

  It was possible to run Windows 95 on a 386 SX, but this led to even less acceptable performance due to its 16-bit external data bus. To achieve optimal performance, Microsoft recommends an
  
   Intel 80486
  
  or compatible CPU with at least 8 MB of RAM.
  

    [22]
   

  Windows 95 may fail to boot on computers with more than approximately 480 MB of memory.
  

    [23]
   



    [24]
   



    [25]
   

  In such case, reducing the file cache size or the size of video memory can help.
  

    [26]
   

  The theoretical maximum according to Microsoft is 2 GB.
  

    [27]
   


  Windows 95 was superseded by
  
   Windows 98
  
  and could still be directly upgraded by either
  
   Windows 2000
  
  Professional
  

    [28]
   

  or
  
   Windows ME
  
  . On December 31, 2001, Microsoft ended its support for Windows 95, making it an "obsolete" product per the Microsoft Lifecycle Policy.
  

    [29]
   

  Even though support for Windows 95 has ended, the software has occasionally remained in use on legacy systems for various purposes. In addition, some video game enthusiasts choose to use Windows 95 for their
  
   legacy system
  
  to play old DOS games, although some other versions of Windows such as Windows 98 can also be used for this purpose.
 
  Most copies of Windows 95 were on
  
   CD-ROM
  
  , but a floppy version could also be had for older machines. The retail floppy disk version of Windows 95 came on 13
  
   DMF
  
  formatted floppy disks, while OSR 2.1 doubled the floppy count to 26. Both versions exclude additional software that the CD-ROM version might have featured.
  
   Microsoft Plus!
  
  for Windows 95 was also available on floppy disks. DMF was a special 21-sector format that Microsoft used to store 1.68 MB on floppy disks rather than the usual 1.44 MB.
 
  Windows 95 originally shipped without
  
   Internet Explorer
  
  , and the default network installation did not install TCP/IP, the network protocol used on the Internet. At the release date of Windows 95, Internet Explorer 1.0 was available, but only in the
  
   Plus!
  
  add-on pack for Windows 95, which was a separate product. The Plus! Pack did not reach as many retail consumers as the operating system itself (it was mainly advertised for its non-Internet-related add-ons such as
  
   themes
  
  and better disk compression) but was usually included in
  
   pre-installed
  
  (
  
   OEM
  
  ) sales, and at the time of Windows 95's release, the web was being browsed mainly with a variety of early web browsers such as
  
   NCSA Mosaic
  
  and
  
   Netscape Navigator
  
  (promoted by products such as
  
   Internet in a Box
  
  ).
 
  Windows 95 OEM Service Release 1 was the first release of Windows to include
  
   Internet Explorer
  
  (version
  
   2.0
  
  ) with the OS. While there was no uninstaller, it could be deleted easily if desired. OEM Service Release 2 included
  
   Internet Explorer 3
  
  . The installation of
  
   Internet Explorer 4
  
  on Windows 95 (or the OSR2.5 version preinstalled on a computer) gave Windows 95 Active Desktop and browser integration into Windows Explorer, known as the
  
   Windows Desktop Update
  
  . The CD version of the last release of Windows 95, OEM Service Release 2.5 (Version 4.00.950C), includes Internet Explorer 4, and installs it after Windows 95's initial setup and first boot are complete.
 
  Only the 4.x series of the browser contained the Windows Desktop Update features, so anyone wanting the new shell had to install IE4 with the desktop update before installing a newer version of Internet Explorer. The last version of Internet Explorer supported on Windows 95 is
  
   Internet Explorer 5.5
  
  , released in 2000. Windows 95 shipped with Microsoft's own dial-up online service called
  
   The Microsoft Network (MSN)
  
  .
 
  The Windows 95 release included a commercial featuring
  
   The Rolling Stones
  
  ' 1981 single "
  
   Start Me Up
  
  " (a reference to the Start button).
  

    [30]
   

  It was widely reported that
  
   Microsoft
  
  paid the Rolling Stones between US$8 and US$14 million for the use of the song in the Windows 95 advertising campaign. However, Microsoft said that this was just a rumor spread by the band to increase their market value, and the company actually paid a fraction of that amount.
  

    [31]
   

  A 30-minute promotional video, labeled a "cyber sitcom," featuring
  
   Jennifer Aniston
  
  and
  
   Matthew Perry
  
  , was also released to showcase the features of Windows 95.
  

    [32]
   

  Microsoft's US$300 million advertising campaign featured stories of people waiting in line outside stores to get a copy.
 
  In the UK, the largest computer chain
  
   PC World
  
  received a large quantity of point of sale material; many branches opened at midnight to sell the first copies of the product. Copies of
  

    The Times
   

  were available for free, and Microsoft paid for 1.5 million issues (twice the daily circulation at the time).
  

    [33]
   


  In the United States, the
  
   Empire State Building
  
  in New York City was lit to match the colors of the Windows logo.
  

    [4]
   

  In Canada, a 328 ft (100 m) banner was hung from the top of the
  
   CN Tower
  
  in
  
   Toronto
  
  .
 
  The release included a number of "Fun Stuff" items on the CD, including music videos of
  
   Edie Brickell
  
  's "Good Times"
  

    [34]
   

  and
  
   Weezer
  
  's "
  
   Buddy Holly
  
  ," a trailer for the 1995 film
  

    Rob Roy
   

  and the computer game
  
   Hover!
  


    [35]
   


  Sales were strong, with one million copies shipped worldwide in just four days.
  

    [36]
   


  A number of Windows 95 editions have been released. Only the original release was sold as a shrink-wrapped product; later editions were provided only to computer
  
   OEMs
  
  for installation on new PCs. For this reason, these editions are known as
  
   OEM Service Releases
  
  (
  
   OSR
  
  ).
 
  Together with the introduction of Windows 95, Microsoft released the
  

    Microsoft Plus!
   
   for Windows 95
  
  pack, which contained a number of optional components for high-end multimedia PCs, including Internet Explorer, DriveSpace and additional themes.
 
  The first service pack was made available half a year after the original release and fixed a number of small bugs.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  The second service pack mainly introduced support for new hardware, most notably support for hard drives larger than 2 GB in the form of the
  
   FAT32
  
  file system. This release was never made available to end-users directly and was only sold through OEMs with the purchase of a new PC.
 
  A full third service pack was never released, but two smaller updates to the second were released in the form of a USB Supplement (OSR 2.1) and the
  
   Windows Desktop Update
  
  (OSR 2.5). Both were available as stand-alone updates and as updated disc images shipped by OEMs. OSR 2.5 was notable for featuring a number of changes to the Windows Explorer, integrating it with Internet Explorer 4.0—this version of Internet Explorer looks very similar to the one featured in Windows 98.
 
  Many features that have become key components of the Microsoft Windows series, such as the
  
   Start menu
  
  and the
  
   taskbar
  
  , originated in Windows 95. Neil MacDonald, a
  
   Gartner
  
  analyst, said that Windows 95 "was a quantum leap in difference in technological capability and stability." Ina Fried of
  

    CNET
   

  said that "by the time Windows 95 was finally ushered off the market in 2001, it had become a fixture on computer desktops around the world."
  

    [33]
   



    Microsoft:
   


    Third-party:
   
