

  A
  
   video game console
  
  is an
  
   electronic
  
  ,
  
   digital
  
  or
  
   computer
  
  device that outputs a
  
   video signal
  
  or visual
  
   image
  
  to display a
  
   video game
  
  that one or more people can play.
 
  The term "video game console" is primarily used to distinguish a console machine primarily designed for consumers to use for playing video games, in contrast to
  
   arcade machines
  
  or
  
   home computers
  
  . An arcade machine consists of a video game computer, display,
  
   game controller
  
  (joystick, buttons, etc.) and
  
   speakers
  
  housed in large chassis. A
  
   home computer
  
  is a personal computer designed for home use for a variety of purposes, such as bookkeeping, accessing the Internet and playing video games.
 
  There are various types of video game consoles, including
  
   home video game consoles
  
  ,
  
   handheld game consoles
  
  ,
  
   microconsoles
  
  and
  
   dedicated consoles
  
  . Although
  
   Ralph Baer
  
  had built working game consoles by 1966, it was nearly a decade before the
  

    Pong
   

  game made them commonplace in regular people's living rooms. Through evolution over the 1990s and 2000s, game consoles have expanded to offer additional functions such as
  
   CD players
  
  ,
  
   DVD players
  
  ,
  
   Blu-ray
  
  disc players,
  
   web browsers
  
  ,
  
   set-top boxes
  
  and more.
 


  The first video games appeared in the 1960s.
  

    [15]
   

  They were played on massive computers connected to
  
   vector displays
  
  , not
  
   analog televisions
  
  .
  
   Ralph H. Baer
  
  conceived the idea of a home video game in 1951. In the late 1960s, while working for
  
   Sanders Associates
  
  , Baer created a series of video game console designs. One of these designs, which gained the nickname of the 1966 "Brown Box", featured changeable game modes and was demonstrated to several TV manufacturers, ultimately leading to an agreement between Sanders Associates and Magnavox.
  

    [16]
   

  In 1972,
  
   Magnavox
  
  released the
  
   Magnavox Odyssey
  
  , the first home video game console which could be connected to a TV set. Ralph Baer's initial design had called for a huge row of switches that would allow players to turn on and off certain components of the console (the Odyssey lacked a
  
   CPU
  
  ) to create slightly different games like tennis, volleyball, hockey, and chase. Magnavox replaced the switch design with separate
  
   cartridges
  
  for each game. Although Baer had sketched up ideas for cartridges that could include new components for new games, the carts released by Magnavox all served the same function as the switches and allowed players to choose from the Odyssey's built-in games.
 
  The Odyssey initially sold about 100,000 units,
  

    [17]
   

  making it moderately successful, and it was not until
  
   Atari
  
  's
  
   arcade game
  


    Pong
   

  popularized video games that the public began to take more notice of the emerging industry. By autumn 1975, Magnavox, bowing to the popularity of
  
   Pong
  
  , cancelled the Odyssey and released a scaled-down version that played only
  
   Pong
  
  and hockey, the
  
   Odyssey 100
  
  . A second, "higher end" console, the
  
   Odyssey 200
  
  , was released with the 100 and added on-screen scoring, up to four players, and a third game—
  
   Smash
  
  . Almost simultaneously released with Atari's own home Pong console through
  
   Sears
  
  , these consoles jump-started the consumer market. All three of the new consoles used simpler designs than the original Odyssey did with no board game pieces or extra cartridges. In the years that followed, the market saw many companies rushing similar consoles to market. After
  
   General Instrument
  
  released their inexpensive microchips, each containing a complete console on a single chip, many small developers began releasing consoles that looked different externally, but internally were playing exactly the same games. Most of the consoles from this era were
  
   dedicated consoles
  
  playing only the games that came with the console. These video game consoles were often just called video games, because there was little reason to distinguish the two yet. While a few companies like
  
   Atari
  
  , Magnavox, and newcomer
  
   Coleco
  
  pushed the envelope, the market became flooded with simple, similar video games.
 
  Fairchild released the
  
   Fairchild Video Entertainment System
  
  (VES) in 1976. While there had been previous game consoles that used cartridges, either the cartridges had no information and served the same function as flipping switches (the Odyssey) or the console itself was empty (
  
   Coleco Telstar
  
  ) and the cartridge contained all of the game components. The VES, however, contained a programmable microprocessor so its cartridges only needed a single ROM chip to store microprocessor instructions. RCA and Atari soon released their own cartridge-based consoles, the
  
   RCA Studio II
  
  and the
  
   Atari 2600
  
  (originally branded as the Atari Video Computer System), respectively.
 
  The first
  
   handheld game console
  
  with interchangeable cartridges was the
  
   Microvision
  
  designed by Smith Engineering, and distributed and sold by
  
   Milton-Bradley
  
  in 1979. Crippled by a small, fragile LCD display and a very narrow selection of games, it was discontinued two years later. The
  
   Epoch Game Pocket Computer
  
  was released in Japan in 1984. The Game Pocket Computer featured an LCD screen with 75 X 64 resolution, and could produce graphics at about the same level as early Atari 2600 games. The system sold very poorly, and as a result only five games were made for it. Nintendo's
  
   Game & Watch
  
  series of dedicated game systems proved more successful. It helped to establish handheld gaming as popular and lasted until 1991. Many Games & Watch games were later re-released on Nintendo's subsequent handheld systems.
 
  The VES continued to be sold at a profit after 1977, and both Bally (with their
  
   Home Library Computer
  
  in 1977) and Magnavox (with the
  
   Odyssey²
  
  in 1978) brought their own programmable cartridge-based consoles to the market. However, it was not until Atari released a conversion of the
  
   golden age arcade
  
  hit
  

    Space Invaders
   

  in 1980 for the
  
   Atari 2600
  
  that the home console industry took off. Many consumers bought an Atari console so they could play
  
   Space Invaders
  
  at home. The unprecedented success of
  

    Space Invaders
   

  started the trend of console manufacturers trying to get exclusive rights to arcade titles, and the trend of advertisements for game consoles claiming to bring the arcade experience home. Throughout the early 1980s, other companies released video game consoles of their own. Many of the video game systems (e.g.
  
   ColecoVision
  
  ) were technically superior to the Atari 2600, and marketed as improvements over the Atari 2600. However, Atari dominated the console market in the early 1980s.
 
  In 1983, the video game business suffered a much more severe crash. A flood of low-quality video games by smaller companies (especially for the 2600), industry leader Atari hyping games such as
  
   E.T
  
  and a 2600 version of
  

    Pac-Man
   

  that were poorly received, and a growing number of
  
   home computer
  
  users caused consumers and retailers to lose faith in video game consoles. Most video game companies filed for bankruptcy, or moved into other industries, abandoning their game consoles. A group of employees from
  
   Mattel Electronics
  
  formed the INTV Corporation and bought the rights for the
  
   Intellivision
  
  . INTV alone continued to manufacture the Intellivision in small quantities and release new Intellivision games until 1991. All other North American game consoles were discontinued by 1984. Revenues generated by the video game industry fell by 97% during the crash.
 
  In 1983,
  
   Nintendo
  
  released the
  
   Family Computer
  
  (or Famicom) in Japan. The Famicom supported high-resolution sprites, larger color palettes, and tiled backgrounds. This allowed Famicom games to be longer and have more detailed graphics. Nintendo began attempts to bring their Famicom to the U.S. after the video game market had crashed. In the U.S., video games were seen as a fad that had already passed. To distinguish its product from older game consoles, Nintendo released their Famicom as the
  
   Nintendo Entertainment System
  
  (NES) which used a front-loading cartridge port similar to a VCR, included a plastic "
  
   robot
  
  " (
  
   R.O.B.
  
  ), and was initially advertised as a toy. The NES was the highest selling console in the history of North America and revitalized the video game market. Mario of
  
   Super Mario Bros.
  
  became a global icon starting with his NES games. Nintendo took a somewhat unusual stance with third-party developers for its console. Nintendo contractually restricted third-party developers to three NES titles per year and forbade them from developing for other video game consoles. The practice ensured Nintendo's market dominance and prevented the flood of trash titles that had helped kill the Atari, but was ruled illegal late in the console's life cycle.
 
  Sega's
  
   Master System
  
  was intended to compete with the NES, but never gained any significant market share in the US or Japan and was barely profitable. It fared notably better in
  
   PAL
  
  territories. In Europe and South America, the Master System competed with the NES and saw new game releases even after Sega's next-generation Mega Drive was released. In Brazil where strict importation laws and rampant piracy kept out competitors, the Master System outsold the NES by a massive margin and remained popular into the 1990s.
  

    [18]
   

  Jack Tramiel, after buying Atari, downsizing its staff, and settling its legal disputes, attempted to bring Atari back into the home console market. Atari released a smaller, sleeker, cheaper version of their popular Atari 2600. They also released the Atari 7800, a console technologically comparable with the NES and backwards compatible with the 2600. Finally Atari repackaged its 8-bit XE home computer as the XEGS game console. The new consoles helped Atari claw its way out of debt, but failed to gain much market share from Nintendo. Atari's lack of funds meant that its consoles saw fewer releases, lower production values (both the manuals and the game labels were frequently black and white), and limited distribution. Additionally two popular 8-bit computers, the Commodore 64 and
  
   Amstrad CPC
  
  , were repackaged as the
  
   Commodore 64 Games System
  
  and
  
   Amstrad GX4000
  
  respectively, for entry into the console market.
 
  In the later part of the third generation, Nintendo also introduced the
  
   Game Boy
  
  , which almost single-handedly solidified and then proceeded to dominate the previously scattered handheld market for 15 years. While the Game Boy product line was incrementally updated every few years, until the
  
   Game Boy Micro
  
  and
  
   Nintendo DS
  
  , and partially the
  
   Game Boy Color
  
  , all Game Boy products were
  
   backwards compatible
  
  with the original released in 1989. Since the Game Boy's release, Nintendo had dominated the handheld market.
 

   NEC
  
  brought the first fourth-generation console to market with their
  
   PC Engine
  
  (or TurboGrafx16) when
  
   Hudson Soft
  
  approached them with an advanced graphics chip. Hudson had previously approached Nintendo, only to be rebuffed by a company still raking in the profits of the NES. The TurboGrafx used the unusual
  
   HuCard
  
  format to store games. The small size of these proprietary cards allowed NEC to
  
   re-release the console
  
  as a
  
   handheld game console
  
  . The PC Engine enjoyed brisk sales in Japan, but its North American counterpart, the TurboGrafx, lagged behind the competition. The console never saw an official release in Europe, but clones and North American imports were available in some markets starting in 1990. NEC advertised their console as "16-bit" to highlight its advances over the NES. This started the trend of all subsequent fourth generations consoles being advertised as 16 bit. Many people still refer to this generation as the 16-bit generation, and often refer to the third generation as "8-bit".
 
  Sega scaled down and adapted their
  
   Sega System 16
  
  (used to power arcade hits like
  
   Altered Beast
  
  and Shinobi) into the
  
   Mega Drive
  
  (sold as the Genesis in North America) and released it with a near arcade-perfect port of Altered Beast. Sega's console met lukewarm sales in Japan, but skyrocketed to first place in PAL markets, and made major inroads in North America. Propelled by its effective "Genesis does what Nintendon't" marketing campaign, Sega capitalized on the Genesis's technological superiority over the NES, faithful ports of popular arcade games, and competitive pricing. The arcade gaming company
  
   SNK
  
  developed the high end
  
   Neo Geo MVS
  
  arcade system which used interchangeable cartridges similar to home consoles. Building on the success of the MVS, SNK repackaged the
  
   NeoGeo
  
  as the
  
   Neo Geo AES
  
  home console. Though technologically superior to the other fourth-generation consoles, the AES and its games were prohibitively expensive, which kept sales low and prevented it from expanding outside its niche market and into serious competition with Nintendo and Sega. The AES did, however, amass a dedicated cult following, allowing it to see new releases into the 2000s. Fourth generation graphics chips allowed these consoles to reproduce the
  
   art styles
  
  that were becoming popular in arcades and on home computers. These games often featured lavish background scenery, huge characters, broader color pallettes, and increased emphasis on dithering and texture. Games written specifically for the NES, like
  
   Megaman
  
  ,
  

    Shatterhand
   

  , and
  

    Super Mario Bros. 3
   

  were able to work cleverly within its limitations. Ports of the increasingly detailed arcade and home computer games came up with various solutions. For example, when Capcom released
  

    Strider
   

  in the arcade they created an entirely separate Strider game for the NES that only incorporated themes and characters from the arcade.
 
  In 1990, Nintendo finally brought their
  
   Super Famicom
  
  to market and brought it to the United States as the
  
   Super NES
  
  (SNES) a year later. Its release marginalized the TurboGrafx and the Neo Geo, but came late enough for Sega to sell several million consoles in North America and gain a strong foothold. The same year the SNES was released Sega released
  

    Sonic the Hedgehog
   

  , which spiked Genesis sales, similar to Space Invaders on the Atari. Also, by 1992 the first fully licensed NFL Football game was released:
  

    NFL Sports Talk Football '93
   

  , which was available only on the Genesis. This impact on Genesis sales, and the overall interest of realistic sports games, would start the trend of licensed sports games being viewed as necessary for the success of a console in the US. While Nintendo enjoyed dominance in Japan, and Sega in Europe, the competition between the two was particularly fierce and close in North America. Ultimately, the SNES outsold the Genesis, but only after Sega discontinued the Genesis to focus on the next generation of consoles.
 
  One trait that remains peculiar to the fourth generation is the huge number of exclusive games. Both Sega and Nintendo were very successful and their consoles developed massive libraries of games. Both consoles had to be programmed in assembly to get the most out of them. A game optimized for the Genesis could take advantage of its faster CPU and sound chip. A game optimized for the SNES could take advantage of its graphics and its flexible, clean sound chip. Some game series, like
  
   Castlevania
  
  , saw separate system exclusive releases rather than an attempt to port one game to disparate platforms. When compact disc (CD) technology became available midway through the fourth generation, each company attempted to integrate it into their existing consoles in different ways. NEC and Sega released CD add-ons to their consoles in the form of the
  
   TurboGrafx-CD
  
  and
  
   Sega CD
  
  , but both were only moderately successful. NEC also released the
  
   TurboDuo
  
  which combined the TurboGrafx-16 and its TurboGrafx-CD add-on (along with the RAM and BIOS upgrade from the Super System Card) into one unit. SNK released a third version of the NeoGeo, the
  
   Neo Geo CD
  
  , allowing the company to release its games on a cheaper medium than the AES's expensive cartridges, but it reached the market after Nintendo and Sega had already sold tens of millions of consoles each. Nintendo partnered with
  
   Sony
  
  to work on a CD add-on for the SNES, but the deal fell apart when they realized how much control Sony wanted. Sony would use their work with Nintendo as the basis for their
  
   PlayStation
  
  game console. While CDs became an increasingly visible part of the market, CD-reading technology was still expensive in the 1990s, limiting NEC's and Sega's add-ons' sales.
 
  The first
  
   handheld game console
  
  released in the fourth generation was the
  
   Game Boy
  
  , on April 21, 1989. It went on to dominate handheld sales by an extremely large margin, despite featuring a low-contrast, unlit monochrome screen while all three of its leading competitors had color. Three major franchises made their debut on the Game Boy:
  

    Tetris
   

  , the Game Boy's
  
   killer application
  
  ;
  
   Pokémon
  
  ; and
  
   Kirby
  
  . With some design (Game Boy Pocket, Game Boy Light) and hardware (Game Boy Color) changes, it continued in production in some form until 2008, enjoying a better than 18-year run. The
  
   Atari Lynx
  
  included hardware-accelerated color graphics, a backlight, and the ability to link up to sixteen units together in an early example of network play when its competitors could only link 2 or 4 consoles (or none at all),
  

    [19]
   

  but its comparatively short battery life (approximately 4.5 hours on a set of alkaline cells, versus 35 hours for the Game Boy), high price, and weak games library made it one of the worst-selling handheld game systems of all time, with less than 500,000 units sold.
  

    [20]
   



    [21]
   


  The third major handheld of the fourth generation was the
  
   Game Gear
  
  . It featured graphics capabilities roughly comparable to the
  
   Master System
  
  (better colours, but lower resolution), a ready made games library by using the "Master-Gear" adaptor to play cartridges from the older console, and the opportunity to be converted into a portable TV using a cheap tuner adaptor, but it also suffered some of the same shortcomings as the Lynx. While it sold more than twenty times as many units as the Lynx, its bulky design - slightly larger than even the original Game Boy; relatively poor battery life - only a little better than the Lynx; and later arrival in the marketplace - competing for sales amongst the remaining buyers who didn't already have a Game Boy - hampered its overall popularity despite being more closely competitive to the Nintendo in terms of price and breadth of software library.
  

    [22]
   

  Sega eventually retired the Game Gear in 1997, a year before Nintendo released the first examples of the Game Boy Color, to focus on the
  
   Nomad
  
  and non-portable console products. Other handheld consoles released during the fourth generation included the
  
   TurboExpress
  
  , a handheld version of the TurboGrafx-16 released by NEC in 1990, and the
  
   Game Boy Pocket
  
  , an improved model of the Game Boy released about two years before the debut of the
  
   Game Boy Color
  
  . While the TurboExpress was another early pioneer of color handheld gaming technology and had the added benefit of using the same game cartridges or 'HuCards' as the TurboGrafx16, it had even worse battery life than the Lynx and Game Gear - about three hours on six contemporary AA batteries - selling only 1.5 million units.
  

    [21]
   


  During this time home computers gained greater prominence as a way of playing video games. The gaming console industry nonetheless continued to thrive alongside home computers, due to the advantages of much lower prices, easier portability, circuitry specifically dedicated towards gaming, the ability to be played on a television set (which PCs of the time could not do in most cases), and intensive first party software support from manufacturers who were essentially banking their entire future on their consoles.
  

    [23]
   


  The first fifth-generation consoles were the
  
   3DO
  
  and the
  
   Atari Jaguar
  
  . Although both consoles were more powerful than the fourth generation systems, neither would become serious threats to
  
   Sega
  
  or
  
   Nintendo
  
  . The 3DO initially generated a great deal of hype in part because of a licensing scheme where 3DO licensed the manufacturing of its console out to third parties, similar to VCR or DVD players. However, unlike its competitors who could sell their consoles at a loss, all 3DO manufacturers had to sell for profit. The cheapest 3DO was more expensive than the SNES and Genesis combined. The Jaguar had three processors and no C libraries to help developers cope with it. Atari was ineffective at courting third parties and many of their first party games were poorly received. Many of the Jaguar's games used mainly the slowest (but most familiar) of the console's processors, resulting in titles that could easily have been released on the SNES or Genesis.
 
  To compete with emerging next gen consoles, Nintendo released
  

    Donkey Kong Country
   

  which could display a wide range of tones (something common in fifth-generation games) by limiting the number of hues onscreen, and
  

    Star Fox
   

  which used an extra chip inside of the cartridge to display polygon graphics. Sega followed suit, releasing
  

    Vectorman
   

  and
  

    Virtua Racing
   

  (the latter of which used the Sega Virtua Processor). Sega also released the
  
   32X
  
  , an add-on for the Genesis, while their
  
   Sega Saturn
  
  was still in development. Despite public statements from Sega claiming that they would continue to support the Genesis/32X throughout the next generation, Sega Enterprises forced Sega of America to abandon the 32X. The 32X's brief and confusing existence damaged public perception of the coming Saturn and Sega as a whole.
 
  While the fourth generation had seen NEC's
  
   TurboGrafx-CD
  
  and Sega's
  
   Sega CD
  
  add-ons, it was not until the fifth generation that CD-based consoles and games began to seriously compete with cartridges. CD-ROMs were significantly cheaper to manufacture and distribute than cartridges were, and gave developers room to add cinematic cut-scenes, pre-recorded soundtracks, and voice acting that made more serious storytelling possible.
  
   NEC
  
  had been developing a successor to the
  
   TurboGrafx-16
  
  as early as 1990, and presented a prototype, dubbed the "Iron Man," to developers in 1992, but shelved the project as the CD-ROM² System managed to extend the console's market viability in Japan into the mid-90s. When sales started to dry up, NEC rushed its old project to the market. The
  
   PC-FX
  
  , a CD-based, 32-bit console, had highly advanced, detailed 2D graphics capabilities, and better full-motion video than any other system on the market. It was, however, incapable of handling 3D graphics, forfeiting its chances at seriously competing with Sony and Sega. The console was limited to a niche market of dating sims and visual novels in Japan, and never saw release in Western markets.
 
  After the abortive 32X, Sega entered the fifth generation with the Saturn. Sega released several highly regarded titles for the Saturn, but a series of bad decisions alienated many developers and retailers. While the Saturn was technologically advanced, it was also complex, difficult, and unintuitive to write games for. In particular, programming 3D graphics that could compete with those on Nintendo and Sony's consoles proved exceptionally difficult for third-party developers. Because the Saturn used quadrilaterals, rather than standard triangles, as its basic polygon, cross platform games had to be completely rewritten to see a Saturn port. The Saturn was also a victim of internal politics at Sega. While the Saturn sold comparably well in Japan, Sega's branches in North America and Europe refused to license localizations of many popular Japanese titles, holding they were ill-suited to Western markets. First-party hits like
  
   Sakura Taisen
  
  never saw Western releases, while several third-party titles released on both
  
   PlayStation
  
  and Saturn in Japan, like
  

    Grandia
   

  and
  

    Castlevania: Symphony of the Night
   

  , were released in North America and Europe as PlayStation exclusives.
 
  Born from a failed attempt to create a console with Nintendo, Sony's PlayStation would not only dominate its generation, but become the first console to sell over 100 million units by expanding the video game market. Sony actively courted third parties and provided them with convenient c libraries to write their games. Sony had built the console from the start as a 3D, disc-based system, and emphasized its 3D graphics that would come to be viewed as the future of gaming. The PlayStation's CD technology won over several developers who had been releasing titles for Nintendo and Sega's fourth generation consoles, such as
  
   Konami
  
  ,
  
   Namco
  
  ,
  
   Capcom
  
  , and
  
   Square
  
  . CDs were far cheaper to manufacture and distribute than cartridges were, meaning developers could release larger batches of games at higher profit margins; Nintendo's console, on the other hand, used cartridges, unwittingly keeping third-party developers away. The PlayStation's internal architecture was simpler and more intuitive to program for, giving the console an edge over Sega's Saturn.
 
  Nintendo was the last to release a fifth generation console with their
  
   Nintendo 64
  
  , and when they finally released their console in North America, it came with only two
  
   launch titles
  
  . Partly to curb piracy and partly as a result of Nintendo's failed disc projects
  
   with Sony
  
  and
  
   Philips
  
  , Nintendo used cartridges for their console. The higher cost of cartridges drove many third party developers to the PlayStation. The Nintendo 64 could handle 3D polygons better than any console released before it, but its games often lacked the cut-scenes, soundtracks, and voice-overs that became standard on PlayStation discs. Nintendo released several highly acclaimed titles, such as
  
   Super Mario 64
  
  and
  
   The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time
  
  , and the Nintendo 64 was able to sell tens of millions of units on the strength of first-party titles alone, but its constant struggles against Sony would make the Nintendo 64 the last home console to use cartridges as a medium for game distribution.
 

       Sega Nomad
      

      Released in 1995
      

        [24]
       



       Game Boy Pocket
      

      Released in 1996
     

       Game.com
      

      Released in September 1997
     

       Game Boy Light
      

      Released in April 1998
     

       Game Boy Color
      

      Released in November 1998
      

        [25]
       



       Neo Geo Pocket
      

      Released in 1998
      
       [
       


          citation needed
         


       ]
      



    [26]
   


  The sixth generation witnessed a shift towards using DVDs for video game media. This brought games that were both longer and more visually appealing. Adding furthermore features with
  
   online console gaming
  
  and implementing both flash and hard drive storage for game data.
 
  During the sixth generation era, the
  
   handheld game console
  
  market expanded with the introduction of new devices from many different manufacturers. Nintendo maintained its dominant share of the handheld market with the release in 2001 of the
  
   Game Boy Advance
  
  , which featured many upgrades and new features over the
  
   Game Boy
  
  . Two redesigns of this system followed, the
  
   Game Boy Advance SP
  
  in 2003 and the
  
   Game Boy Micro
  
  in 2005. Also introduced were the
  
   Neo Geo Pocket Color
  
  in 1998 and
  
   Bandai
  
  's
  
   WonderSwan Color
  
  , launched in Japan in 1999. South Korean company
  
   Game Park
  
  introduced its
  
   GP32
  
  handheld in 2001, and with it came the dawn of
  
   open source
  
  handheld consoles. The Game Boy Advance line of handhelds has sold 81.51 million units worldwide as of September 30, 2010.
  

    [29]
   


  A major new addition to the market was the trend for corporations to include a large number of "non-gaming" features into their handheld consoles, including
  
   cell phones
  
  ,
  
   MP3 players
  
  , portable movie players, and
  
   PDA
  
  -like features. The handheld that started this trend was
  
   Nokia
  
  's
  
   N-Gage
  
  , which was released in 2003 and doubled primarily as a mobile phone. It went through a redesign in 2004 and was renamed the
  
   N-Gage QD
  
  . A second handheld, the
  
   Zodiac
  
  from Tapwave, was released in 2004; based on the
  
   Palm OS
  
  , it offered specialized gaming-oriented video and sound capabilities, but it had an unwieldy development kit due to the underlying Palm OS foundation. With more and more PDAs arriving during the previous generation, the difference between consumer electronics and traditional computing began to blur and cheap console technology grew as a result. It was said of PDAs that they were "the computers of handheld gaming" because of their multi-purpose capabilities and the increasingly powerful computer hardware that resided within them. This capability existed to move gaming beyond the last generation's 16-bit limitations; however, PDAs were still geared towards the typical businessman, and lacked new, affordable software franchises to compete with dedicated handheld gaming consoles.
 
  Video game consoles had become an important part of the global
  
   IT infrastructure
  
  . It is estimated that video game consoles represented 25% of the world's general-purpose computational power in the year 2007.
  

    [30]
   


  The features introduced in this generation include the support of new disc formats:
  
   Blu-ray Disc
  
  , utilized by the PlayStation 3, and
  
   HD DVD
  
  supported by the Xbox 360 via an optional
  
   $200 external accessory addition
  
  , that was later discontinued as the
  
   format war
  
  closed. Another new technology is the use of motion as input, and IR tracking (as implemented on the Wii). Also, all seventh generation consoles support wireless controllers. This generation also introduces the
  
   Nintendo DS
  
  , and the Nintendo DSi, which add touch screens and cameras to portable gaming.
 
  For
  
   handheld game consoles
  
  , the seventh generation began with the release of the
  
   Nintendo DS
  
  on November 21, 2004. This handheld was based on a design fundamentally different from the
  
   Game Boy
  
  and other handheld video game systems. The Nintendo DS offered new modes of input over previous generations such as a touch screen, the ability to connect wirelessly using IEEE 802.11b, as well as a microphone to speak to in-game NPCs.
  

    [32]
   

  On December 12, 2004, Sony released its first handheld,
  
   PlayStation Portable
  
  . The PlayStation Portable was marketed at launch to an above 25-year-old
  

    [33]
   

  or "core gamer" market,
  

    [34]
   

  while the Nintendo DS proved to be popular with both core gamers and new customers.
  

    [35]
   


   Nokia
  
  revived its
  
   N-Gage
  
  platform in the form of a service for selected
  
   S60
  
  devices.
  
   This new service
  
  launched on April 3, 2008.
  

    [36]
   

  Other less-popular handheld systems released during this generation include the
  
   Gizmondo
  
  (launched on March 19, 2005 and discontinued in February 2006) and the
  
   GP2X
  
  (launched on November 10, 2005 and discontinued in August 2008). The
  
   GP2X Wiz
  
  ,
  
   Pandora
  
  , and
  
   Gizmondo 2
  
  were scheduled for release in 2009. Another aspect of the seventh generation was the beginning of direct competition between dedicated handheld gaming devices, and increasingly powerful PDA/cell phone devices such as the
  
   iPhone
  
  and
  
   iPod Touch
  
  , and the latter being aggressively marketed for gaming purposes. Simple games such as
  
   Tetris
  
  and
  
   Solitaire
  
  had existed for PDA devices since their introduction, but by 2009 PDAs and phones had grown sufficiently powerful to where complex graphical games could be implemented, with the advantage of distribution over wireless broadband.
 
  Aside from the usual hardware enhancements, consoles of the eighth generation focus on further integration with other media and increased connectivity.
  

    [39]
   

  The
  
   3DS
  
  introduced
  
   autostereoscopic 3D
  
  on consoles. The
  
   Wii U
  
  introduced a controller/tablet hybrid whose features include the possibility of augmented reality in gaming.
  

    [40]
   

  The
  
   PlayStation 4
  
  is Sony's eighth generation console, featuring a "share" button to stream video game content between devices, released on November 15, 2013. Microsoft released their next generation console, the
  
   Xbox One
  
  , on November 22, 2013.
  

    [41]
   

  On March 3, 2017, following poor sales of the Wii U, Nintendo released the
  
   Nintendo Switch
  
  , a 'hybrid' console with a battery-powered tablet-like monitor that can be played by itself or connected to a television via a
  
   dock
  
  .
 
  Game systems in the eighth generation also faced increasing competition from mobile device platforms such as Apple's
  
   iOS
  
  and Google's
  
   Android
  
  operating systems. Smartphone ownership was estimated to reach roughly a quarter of the world's population by the end of 2014.
  

    [42]
   

  The proliferation of low-cost games for these devices, such as
  

    Angry Birds
   

  with over 2 billion downloads worldwide,
  

    [43]
   

  presents a new challenge to classic video game systems.
  
   Microconsoles
  
  , cheaper stand-alone devices designed to play games from previously established platforms, also increased options for consumers. Many of these projects were spurred on by the use of new
  
   crowdfunding
  
  techniques through sites such as
  
   Kickstarter
  
  . Notable competitors include the
  
   GamePop
  
  ,
  
   OUYA
  
  ,
  
   GameStick
  
  Android-based systems, the
  
   PlayStation TV
  
  , the
  
   NVIDIA SHIELD
  
  and
  
   Steam Machines
  
  .
  

    [44]
   

  Despite the increased competition, the sales for major console manufacturers featured strong starts. The PlayStation 4 sold 1 million consoles within 24 hours in 2 countries, whilst the Xbox One sold 1 million consoles within 24 hours in 13 countries.
  

    [45]
   

  As of December 6, 2016, over 50 million PlayStation 4 consoles have been sold worldwide,
  

    [46]
   

  and 10 million Xbox One units have shipped to retailers (by the end of 2014),
  

    [47]
   

  both outpacing sales of their seventh generation systems. In May, Nintendo announced that it had sold only 2.8 million Wii U consoles, falling far short of their forecasts.
  

    [48]
   


  Game cartridges consist of a
  
   printed circuit board
  
  housed inside of a plastic casing, with a connector allowing the device to interface with the console. The circuit board can contain a wide variety of components. All cartridge games contain at the minimum,
  
   read only memory
  
  with the software written on it. Many cartridges also carry components that increase the original console's power, such as extra RAM or a coprocessor. Components can also be added to extend the original hardware's functionality
  

    [60]
   

  (such as
  
   gyroscopes, rumble packs
  
  ,
  
   tilt-sensors
  
  ,
  
   light sensors
  
  , etc.); this is more common on handheld consoles where the user does not interact with the game through a separate video game controller.
  

    [61]
   

  Cartridges were the first external media to be used with home consoles and remained the most common until 1995 continued improvements in capacity (Nintendo 64 being the last mainstream game console to use cartridges).
  

    [62]
   

  Nevertheless, the relatively high manufacturing costs saw them completely replaced by optical media for home consoles by the early 21st century, although they are still in use in some handheld video game consoles. Due to the aforementioned capabilities of cartridges such as more memory and coprocessors, those factors make it harder to reverse engineer consoles to be used on emulators.
 
  Several consoles such as the
  
   Master System
  
  and the
  
   TurboGrafx-16
  
  have used different types of
  
   smart cards
  
  as an external medium. These cards function similar to simple cartridges. Information is stored on a chip that is housed in plastic. Cards are more compact and simpler than cartridges, though. This makes them cheaper to produce and smaller, but limits what can be done with them. Cards cannot hold extra components, and common cartridge techniques like
  
   bank switching
  
  (a technique used to create very large games) were impossible to miniaturize into a card in the late 1980s.
  

    [63]
   



    [64]
   

  Compact Discs reduced much of the need for cards. Optical Discs can hold more information than cards, and are cheaper to produce. The Nintendo GameCube and the PlayStation 2 use
  
   memory cards
  
  for storage, but the
  
   PlayStation Vita
  
  ,
  
   Nintendo 3DS
  
  , and
  
   Nintendo Switch
  
  are currently the only modern systems to use cards for game distribution. Nintendo has long used cartridges with their Game Boy line of hand held consoles because of their durability, small size, stability (not shaking and vibrating the handheld when it is in use), and low battery consumption. Nintendo switched to cards starting with the DS, because advances in memory technology made putting extra memory on the cartridge unnecessary.
  

    [65]
   

  The PlayStation Vita uses Sony's own proprietary flash-memory Vita cards as one method of game distribution.
  

    [66]
   


  Home computers have long used
  
   magnetic storage
  
  devices. Both
  
   tape drives
  
  and
  
   floppy disk
  
  drives were common on early
  
   microcomputers
  
  . Their popularity is in large part because a tape drive or disk drive can write to any material it can read. However, magnetic media is volatile and can be more easily damaged than game cartridges or optical discs.
  

    [67]
   

  Among the first consoles to use magnetic media were the
  
   Bally Astrocade
  
  and
  
   APF-M1000
  
  , both of which could use cassette tapes through expansions. In Bally's case, this allowed the console to see new game development even after Bally dropped support for it. While magnetic media remained limited in use as a primary form of distribution, three popular subsequent consoles also had expansions available to allow them to use this format. The
  
   Starpath Supercharger
  
  can load Atari 2600 games from audio cassettes; Starpath used it to cheaply distribute their own games from 1982 to 1984 and today it is used by many programmers to test, distribute, and play
  
   homebrew software
  
  . The
  
   Disk System
  
  , a floppy disk-reading add-on to the
  
   Famicom
  
  (as the NES was known in Japan), was released by Nintendo in 1986 for the Japanese market. Nintendo sold the disks cheaply and sold vending machines where customers could have new games written to their disks up to 500 times.
  

    [68]
   

  In 1999, Nintendo released another Japan-only floppy disk add-on, the
  
   Nintendo 64DD
  
  , for the
  
   Nintendo 64
  
  .
 
  In the mid-1990s, various manufacturers shifted to optical media, specifically CD-ROM, for games. Although they were slower at loading game data than the cartridges available at that time, they were significantly cheaper to manufacture and had a larger capacity than the existing cartridge technology.
  
   Sega
  
  released the second CD based gaming system with the
  
   Mega CD
  
  in Japan on December 12, 1991.
  
   Commodore
  
  followed shortly after with the
  
   Amiga-CD32
  
  in September 1993, the first 32-bit game console. By the early 21st century, all of the major home consoles used optical media, usually DVD-ROM or similar disks, which are widely replacing CD-ROM for data storage. The PlayStation 3 system uses even higher-capacity
  
   Blu-ray
  
  optical discs for games and movies while the Xbox 360 formerly used
  
   HD DVDs
  
  in the form of an external
  
   USB
  
  player add-on for movies, before it was discontinued. However, Microsoft still supports those who bought the accessory.
 
  All three seventh generation consoles (the PlayStation 3, Wii, and Xbox 360) offer some kind of Internet games distribution service, allowing users to download games for a fee onto some form of non-volatile storage, typically a hard disk or flash memory. Recently, the console manufacturers have been taking advantage of internet distribution with games, video streaming services like
  
   Netflix
  
  ,
  
   Hulu Plus
  
  and film trailers being available.
 
  Each new generation of console hardware made use of the rapid development of processing technology. Newer machines could output a greater range of colors, more
  
   sprites
  
  , and introduced graphical technologies such as
  
   scaling
  
  , and
  
   vector graphics
  
  . One way console makers marketed these advances to consumers was through the measurement of
  
   "bits".
  
  The
  
   TurboGrafx-16
  
  , Genesis, and Super NES were among the first consoles to advertise the fact that they contained 16-bit
  
   processors
  
  . This fourth generation of console hardware was often referred to as the 16-bit era, and the previous generation as the 8-bit. The
  
   bit-value
  
  of a console referred to the
  

    word length
   

  of a console's processor (although the value was sometimes misused, for example the TurboGrafx 16 had only an 8-bit
  
   CPU
  
  , and the Genesis/Mega Drive had the 16/32-bit
  
   Motorola 68000
  
  , but both had a 16-bit dedicated graphics processor). As the graphical performance of console hardware is dependent on many factors, using bits was a crude way to gauge a console's overall ability. For example, the NES, Commodore 64, Apple II, and Atari 2600 all used a very similar 8-bit CPU. The difference in their processing power is due to other causes. For example, the Commodore 64 contains 64 kilobytes of RAM and the Atari 2600 has much less at 128 bytes of RAM. The jump from 8-bit machines to 16-bit machines to 32-bit machines made a noticeable difference in performance, so consoles from certain generations are frequently referred to as 8-bit or 16-bit consoles. However, the "bits" in a console are no longer a major factor in their performance. The Nintendo 64, for example has been outpaced by several 32-bit machines.
  

    [69]
   

