


   Cloud computing
  
  is a type of
  
   Internet
  
  -based computing that provides shared computer processing resources and data to computers and other devices on demand. It is a model for enabling ubiquitous, on-demand access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., computer networks, servers, storage, applications and services),
  

    [1]
   



    [2]
   

  which can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort. Cloud computing and storage solutions provide users and enterprises with various capabilities to store and process their data in either privately owned, or third-party
  
   data centers
  


    [3]
   

  that may be located far from the user–ranging in distance from across a city to across the world. Cloud computing relies on sharing of resources to achieve coherence and
  
   economy of scale
  
  , similar to a utility (like the
  
   electricity grid
  
  ) over an electricity network.
 
  Advocates claim that cloud computing allows companies to avoid up-front infrastructure costs (e.g., purchasing
  
   servers
  
  ). As well, it enables organizations to focus on their core businesses instead of spending time and money on computer infrastructure.
  

    [4]
   

  Proponents also claim that cloud computing allows enterprises to get their applications up and running faster, with improved manageability and less maintenance, and enables
  
   Information technology
  
  (IT) teams to more rapidly adjust resources to meet fluctuating and unpredictable business demand.
  

    [4]
   



    [5]
   



    [6]
   

  Cloud providers typically use a "pay as you go" model. This will lead to unexpectedly high charges if administrators do not adapt to the cloud pricing model.
  

    [7]
   


  In 2009, the availability of high-capacity networks, low-cost computers and storage devices as well as the widespread adoption of
  
   hardware virtualization
  
  ,
  
   service-oriented architecture
  
  , and
  
   autonomic
  
  and utility computing led to a growth in cloud computing.
  

    [8]
   



    [9]
   



    [10]
   

  Companies can scale up as computing needs increase and then scale down again as demands decrease.
  

    [11]
   

  In 2013, it was reported that cloud computing had become a highly demanded service or utility due to the advantages of high computing power, cheap cost of services, high performance, scalability, accessibility as well as availability. Some cloud vendors are experiencing growth rates of 50% per year,
  

    [12]
   

  but being still in a stage of infancy, it has pitfalls that need to be addressed to make cloud computing services more reliable and user friendly.
  

    [13]
   



    [14]
   




  The origin of the term
  
   cloud computing
  
  is unclear. The word "cloud" is commonly used in science to describe a large agglomeration of objects that visually appear from a distance as a cloud and describes any set of things whose details are not further inspected in a given context.
  

    [15]
   

  Another explanation is that the old programs that drew network schematics surrounded the icons for servers with a circle, and a cluster of servers in a network diagram had several overlapping circles, which resembled a cloud.
  

    [16]
   

  In analogy to the above usage, the word
  
   cloud
  
  was used as a metaphor for the Internet and a standardized cloud-like shape was used to denote a network on telephony schematics. Later it was used to depict the Internet in
  
   computer network diagrams
  
  . With this simplification, the implication is that the specifics of how the end points of a network are connected are not relevant for the purposes of understanding the diagram. The cloud symbol was used to represent networks of computing equipment in the original
  
   ARPANET
  
  by as early as 1977,
  

    [17]
   

  and the
  
   CSNET
  
  by 1981
  

    [18]
   

  —both predecessors to the Internet itself.
 
  The term
  
   cloud
  
  has been used to refer to platforms for
  
   distributed computing
  
  . In
  

    Wired's
   

  April 1994 feature "Bill and Andy's Excellent Adventure II" on the
  
   Apple
  
  spin-off
  
   General Magic
  
  ,
  
   Andy Hertzfeld
  
  commented on General Magic's distributed programming language
  
   Telescript
  
  that:
 
   "The beauty of Telescript ... is that now, instead of just having a device to program, we now have the entire Cloud out there, where a single program can go and travel to many different sources of information and create sort of a virtual service. No one had conceived that before. The example Jim White [the designer of Telescript,
   
    X.400
   
   and
   
    ASN.1
   
   ] uses now is a date-arranging service where a software agent goes to the flower store and orders flowers and then goes to the ticket shop and gets the tickets for the show, and everything is communicated to both parties."
  
  References to "cloud computing" in its modern sense appeared as early as 1996, with the earliest known mention in a
  
   Compaq
  
  internal document.
  

    [20]
   

  The popularization of the term can be traced to 2006 when Amazon.com introduced its
  
   Elastic Compute Cloud
  
  .
  

    [21]
   


  During the 1960s, the initial concepts of time-sharing became popularized via RJE (
  
   Remote Job Entry
  
  );
  

    [22]
   

  this terminology was mostly associated with large vendors such as
  
   IBM
  
  and
  
   DEC
  
  . Full time-sharing solutions were available by the early 1970s on such platforms as Multics (on GE hardware), Cambridge CTSS, and the earliest UNIX ports (on DEC hardware). Yet, the "data center" model where users submitted jobs to operators to run on IBM mainframes was overwhelmingly predominant.
 
  In the 1990s, telecommunications companies, who previously offered primarily dedicated point-to-point data circuits, began offering
  
   virtual private network
  
  (VPN) services with comparable quality of service, but at a lower cost. By switching traffic as they saw fit to balance server use, they could use overall network bandwidth more effectively.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  They began to use the cloud symbol to denote the demarcation point between what the provider was responsible for and what users were responsible for. Cloud computing extended this boundary to cover all servers as well as the network infrastructure.
  

    [23]
   

  As computers became more diffused, scientists and technologists explored ways to make large-scale computing power available to more users through time-sharing.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  They experimented with algorithms to optimize the infrastructure, platform, and applications to prioritize CPUs and increase efficiency for end users.
  

    [24]
   


  Since 2000, cloud computing has come into existence. In early 2008,
  
   NASA
  
  's
  
   OpenNebula
  
  , enhanced in the RESERVOIR European Commission-funded project, became the first open-source software for deploying private and hybrid clouds, and for the federation of clouds.
  

    [25]
   

  In the same year, efforts were focused on providing
  
   quality of service
  
  guarantees (as required by real-time interactive applications) to cloud-based infrastructures, in the framework of the IRMOS European Commission-funded project, resulting in a real-time cloud environment.
  

    [26]
   



    [27]
   

  By mid-2008, Gartner saw an opportunity for cloud computing "to shape the relationship among consumers of IT services, those who use IT services and those who sell them"
  

    [28]
   

  and observed that "organizations are switching from company-owned hardware and software assets to per-use service-based models" so that the "projected shift to computing ... will result in dramatic growth in IT products in some areas and significant reductions in other areas."
  

    [29]
   


  In August 2006
  
   Amazon
  
  introduced its
  
   Elastic Compute Cloud
  
  .
  

    [21]
   


   Microsoft Azure
  
  was announced as "Azure" in October 2008 and was released on 1 February 2010 as Windows Azure, before being renamed to Microsoft Azure on 25 March 2014.
  

    [30]
   

  For a time, Azure was on the
  
   TOP500
  
  supercomputer list, before it dropped off it.
  

    [31]
   

  In July 2010,
  
   Rackspace Hosting
  
  and
  
   NASA
  
  jointly launched an open-source cloud-software initiative known as
  
   OpenStack
  
  . The OpenStack project intended to help organizations offering cloud-computing services running on standard hardware. The early code came from NASA's
  
   Nebula platform
  
  as well as from
  
   Rackspace's Cloud Files
  
  platform. On March 1, 2011, IBM announced the
  
   IBM SmartCloud
  
  framework to support
  
   Smarter Planet
  
  .
  

    [32]
   

  Among the various components of the
  
   Smarter Computing
  
  foundation, cloud computing is a critical part. On June 7, 2012, Oracle announced the
  
   Oracle Cloud
  
  .
  

    [33]
   

  While aspects of the Oracle Cloud are still in development, this cloud offering is poised to be the first to provide users with access to an integrated set of IT solutions, including the Applications (
  
   SaaS
  
  ), Platform (
  
   PaaS
  
  ), and Infrastructure (
  
   IaaS
  
  ) layers.
  

    [34]
   



    [35]
   



    [36]
   


  In April of 2008,
  
   Google
  
  released
  
   Google App Engine
  
  in beta.
  

    [37]
   

  In May of 2012,
  
   Google Compute Engine
  
  was released in preview, before being rolled out into General Availability in December of 2013.
  

    [38]
   


  Cloud computing is the result of the evolution and adoption of existing technologies and paradigms. The goal of cloud computing is to allow users to take beneﬁt from all of these technologies, without the need for deep knowledge about or expertise with each one of them. The cloud aims to cut costs, and helps the users focus on their core business instead of being impeded by IT obstacles.
  

    [39]
   

  The main enabling technology for cloud computing is
  
   virtualization
  
  . Virtualization software separates a physical computing device into one or more "virtual" devices, each of which can be easily used and managed to perform computing tasks. With
  
   operating system–level virtualization
  
  essentially creating a scalable system of multiple independent computing devices, idle computing resources can be allocated and used more efficiently. Virtualization provides the agility required to speed up IT operations, and reduces cost by increasing infrastructure
  
   utilization
  
  . Autonomic computing automates the process through which the user can provision resources
  
   on-demand
  
  . By minimizing user involvement, automation speeds up the process, reduces labor costs and reduces the possibility of human errors.
  

    [39]
   

  Users routinely face difficult business problems. Cloud computing adopts concepts from
  
   Service-oriented Architecture
  
  (SOA) that can help the user break these problems into
  
   services
  
  that can be integrated to provide a solution. Cloud computing provides all of its resources as services, and makes use of the well-established standards and best practices gained in the domain of SOA to allow global and easy access to cloud services in a standardized way.
 
  Cloud computing also leverages concepts from utility computing to provide
  
   metrics
  
  for the services used. Such metrics are at the core of the public cloud pay-per-use models. In addition, measured services are an essential part of the feedback loop in autonomic computing, allowing services to scale on-demand and to perform automatic failure recovery. Cloud computing is a kind of
  
   grid computing
  
  ; it has evolved by addressing the QoS (quality of service) and
  
   reliability
  
  problems. Cloud computing provides the tools and technologies to build data/compute intensive parallel applications with much more affordable prices compared to traditional
  
   parallel computing
  
  techniques.
  

    [39]
   


  Cloud computing shares characteristics with:
 
  Cloud computing exhibits the following key characteristics:
 
  The
  
   National Institute of Standards and Technology
  
  's definition of cloud computing identifies "five essential characteristics":
 

    On-demand self-service.
   
   A consumer can unilaterally provision computing capabilities, such as server time and network storage, as needed automatically without requiring human interaction with each service provider.
  

    Broad network access.
   
   Capabilities are available over the network and accessed through standard mechanisms that promote use by heterogeneous thin or thick client platforms (e.g., mobile phones, tablets,
   
    laptops
   
   , and workstations).
  

    Resource pooling.
   
   The provider's computing resources are pooled to serve multiple consumers using a multi-tenant model, with different physical and virtual resources dynamically assigned and reassigned according to consumer demand.
  

    Rapid elasticity.
   
   Capabilities can be elastically provisioned and released, in some cases automatically, to scale rapidly outward and inward commensurate with demand. To the consumer, the capabilities available for provisioning often appear unlimited and can be appropriated in any quantity at any time.
  
  Though
  
   service-oriented architecture
  
  advocates "everything as a service" (with the acronyms
  
   EaaS
  
  or
  
   XaaS
  
  or simply
  

    aas
   

  ),
  

    [61]
   

  cloud-computing providers offer their "services" according to different models, of which the three standard models per NIST are Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS).
  

    [2]
   

  These models offer increasing abstraction; they are thus often portrayed as a
  
   layers
  
  in a
  
   stack
  
  : infrastructure-, platform- and software-as-a-service,
  

    [62]
   

  but these need not be related. For example, one can provide SaaS implemented on physical machines (bare metal), without using underlying PaaS or IaaS layers, and conversely one can run a program on IaaS and access it directly, without wrapping it as SaaS.
 
  The NIST's definition of cloud computing defines the service models as follows:
  

    [2]
   



    Software as a Service (SaaS).
   
   The capability provided to the consumer is to use the provider’s applications running on a cloud infrastructure. The applications are accessible from various client devices through either a thin client interface, such as a web browser (e.g., web-based email), or a program interface. The consumer does not manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure including network, servers, operating systems, storage, or even individual application capabilities, with the possible exception of limited user-specific application configuration settings.
  

    Platform as a Service (PaaS).
   
   The capability provided to the consumer is to deploy onto the cloud infrastructure consumer-created or acquired applications created using programming languages, libraries, services, and tools supported by the provider. The consumer does not manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure including network, servers, operating systems, or storage, but has control over the deployed applications and possibly configuration settings for the application-hosting environment.
  

    Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS).
   
   The capability provided to the consumer is to provision processing, storage, networks, and other fundamental computing resources where the consumer is able to deploy and run arbitrary software, which can include operating systems and applications. The consumer does not manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure but has control over operating systems, storage, and deployed applications; and possibly limited control of select networking components (e.g., host firewalls).
  
  According to the
  
   Internet Engineering Task Force
  
  (IETF), the most basic cloud-service model is that of providers offering computing infrastructure –
  
   virtual machines
  
  and other resources – as a service to subscribers.
  
   Infrastructure as a service
  
  (IaaS) refers to online services that abstract the user from the details of infrastructure like physical computing resources, location, data partitioning, scaling, security, backup etc. A
  
   hypervisor
  
  , such as
  
   Xen
  
  ,
  
   Oracle VirtualBox
  
  ,
  
   Oracle VM
  
  ,
  
   KVM
  
  ,
  
   VMware ESX/ESXi
  
  , or
  
   Hyper-V
  
  , runs the virtual machines as guests. Pools of hypervisors within the cloud operational system can support large numbers of virtual machines and the ability to scale services up and down according to customers' varying requirements. Linux containers run in isolated partitions of a single
  
   Linux kernel
  
  running directly on the physical hardware. Linux
  
   cgroups
  
  and namespaces are the underlying Linux kernel technologies used to isolate, secure and manage the containers. Containerisation offers higher performance than virtualization, because there is no hypervisor overhead. Also, container capacity auto-scales dynamically with computing load, which eliminates the problem of over-provisioning and enables usage-based billing.
  

    [63]
   

  IaaS clouds often offer additional resources such as a virtual-machine
  
   disk-image
  
  library, raw
  
   block storage
  
  , file or
  
   object storage
  
  , firewalls, load balancers, IP addresses,
  
   virtual local area networks
  
  (VLANs), and software bundles.
  

    [64]
   


  IaaS-cloud providers supply these resources on-demand from their large pools of equipment installed in
  
   data centers
  
  . For
  
   wide-area
  
  connectivity, customers can use either the Internet or
  
   carrier clouds
  
  (dedicated
  
   virtual private networks
  
  ). To deploy their applications, cloud users install operating-system images and their application software on the cloud infrastructure.
  

    [65]
   


   [
   


      unreliable source?
     


   ]
  
  In this model, the cloud user patches and maintains the operating systems and the application software. Cloud providers typically bill IaaS services on a utility computing basis: cost reflects the amount of resources allocated and consumed.
  

    [66]
   



    [67]
   



    [68]
   



    [69]
   


  PaaS vendors offer a development environment to application developers. The provider typically develops toolkit and standards for development and channels for distribution and payment. In the PaaS models, cloud providers deliver a
  
   computing platform
  
  , typically including operating system, programming-language execution environment, database, and web server. Application developers can develop and run their software solutions on a cloud platform without the cost and complexity of buying and managing the underlying hardware and software layers. With some PaaS offers like
  
   Microsoft Azure
  
  and
  
   Google App Engine
  
  , the underlying computer and storage resources scale automatically to match application demand so that the cloud user does not have to allocate resources manually. The latter has also been proposed by an architecture aiming to facilitate real-time in cloud environments.
  

    [70]
   


   [
   


      need quotation to verify
     


   ]
  
  Even more specific application types can be provided via PaaS, such as media encoding as provided by services like bitcodin.com
  

    [71]
   

  or media.io.
  

    [72]
   


  Some integration and data management providers have also embraced specialized applications of PaaS as delivery models for data solutions. Examples include
  
   iPaaS (Integration Platform as a Service)
  
  and
  
   dPaaS (Data Platform as a Service)
  
  . iPaaS enables customers to develop, execute and govern integration flows.
  

    [73]
   

  Under the iPaaS integration model, customers drive the development and deployment of integrations without installing or managing any hardware or middleware.
  

    [74]
   

  dPaaS delivers integration—and data-management—products as a fully managed service.
  

    [75]
   

  Under the dPaaS model, the PaaS provider, not the customer, manages the development and execution of data solutions by building tailored data applications for the customer. dPaaS users retain transparency and control over data through
  
   data-visualization
  
  tools.
  

    [76]
   

  Platform as a Service (PaaS) consumers do not manage or control the underlying cloud infrastructure including network, servers, operating systems, or storage, but have control over the deployed applications and possibly configuration settings for the application-hosting environment.
 
  A recent specialized PaaS is the
  

    Blockchain
   
   as a Service (BaaS)
  
  , that some vendors such as
  
   Microsoft Azure
  
  have already included in their PaaS offering.
  

    [77]
   


  In the software as a service (SaaS) model, users gain access to application software and databases. Cloud providers manage the infrastructure and platforms that run the applications. SaaS is sometimes referred to as "on-demand software" and is usually priced on a pay-per-use basis or using a subscription fee.
  

    [78]
   

  In the SaaS model, cloud providers install and operate application software in the cloud and cloud users access the software from cloud clients. Cloud users do not manage the cloud infrastructure and platform where the application runs. This eliminates the need to install and run the application on the cloud user's own computers, which simplifies maintenance and support. Cloud applications differ from other applications in their scalability—which can be achieved by cloning tasks onto multiple
  
   virtual machines
  
  at run-time to meet changing work demand.
  

    [79]
   


   Load balancers
  
  distribute the work over the set of virtual machines. This process is transparent to the cloud user, who sees only a single access-point. To accommodate a large number of cloud users, cloud applications can be
  

    multitenant
   

  , meaning that any machine may serve more than one cloud-user organization.
 
  The pricing model for SaaS applications is typically a monthly or yearly flat fee per user,
  

    [80]
   

  so prices become scalable and adjustable if users are added or removed at any point.
  

    [81]
   

  Proponents claim that SaaS gives a
  
   business
  
  the potential to reduce IT operational costs by outsourcing hardware and software maintenance and support to the cloud provider. This enables the business to reallocate IT operations costs away from hardware/software spending and from personnel expenses, towards meeting other goals. In addition, with applications hosted centrally, updates can be released without the need for users to install new software. One drawback of SaaS comes with storing the users' data on the cloud provider's server. As a result,
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  there could be unauthorized access to the data. For this reason, users are increasingly
  
   [
   


      quantify
     


   ]
  
  adopting intelligent third-party
  
   key-management
  
  systems to help secure their data.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  In the mobile "backend" as a service (m) model, also known as
  
   backend as a service (BaaS)
  
  ,
  
   web app
  
  and
  
   mobile app
  
  developers are provided with a way to link their applications to
  
   cloud storage
  
  and cloud computing services with
  
   application programming interfaces
  
  (APIs) exposed to their applications and custom
  
   software development kits
  
  (SDKs). Services include user management,
  
   push notifications
  
  , integration with
  
   social networking services
  


    [82]
   

  and more. This is a relatively recent model in cloud computing,
  

    [83]
   

  with most BaaS
  
   startups
  
  dating from 2011 or later
  

    [84]
   



    [85]
   



    [86]
   

  but trends indicate that these services are gaining significant mainstream traction with enterprise consumers.
  

    [87]
   


  Serverless computing is a cloud computing code
  
   execution
  
  model in which the cloud provider fully manages starting and stopping
  
   virtual machines
  
  as necessary to serve requests, and requests are billed by an abstract measure of the resources required to satisfy the request, rather than per virtual machine, per hour.
  

    [88]
   

  Despite the name, it does not actually involve running code without servers.
  

    [88]
   

  Serverless computing is so named because the business or person that owns the system does not have to purchase, rent or provision servers or virtual machines for the
  
   back-end
  
  code to run on.
 
  Users access cloud computing using networked client devices, such as
  
   desktop computers
  
  ,
  
   laptops
  
  ,
  
   tablets
  
  and
  
   smartphones
  
  and any Ethernet enabled device such as Home Automation Gadgets. Some of these devices—
  
   cloud clients
  
  —rely on cloud computing for all or a majority of their applications so as to be essentially useless without it. Examples are
  
   thin clients
  
  and the browser-based
  
   Chromebook
  
  . Many cloud applications do not require specific software on the client and instead use a web browser to interact with the cloud application. With
  
   Ajax
  
  and
  
   HTML5
  
  these
  
   Web user interfaces
  
  can achieve a similar, or even better,
  
   look and feel
  
  to native applications. Some cloud applications, however, support specific client software dedicated to these applications (e.g.,
  
   virtual desktop
  
  clients and most email clients). Some legacy applications (line of business applications that until now have been prevalent in thin client computing) are delivered via a screen-sharing technology.
 
  Private cloud is cloud infrastructure operated solely for a single organization, whether managed internally or by a third-party, and hosted either internally or externally.
  

    [2]
   

  Undertaking a private cloud project requires a significant level and degree of engagement to virtualize the business environment, and requires the organization to reevaluate decisions about existing resources. When done right, it can improve business, but every step in the project raises security issues that must be addressed to prevent serious vulnerabilities. Self-run data centers
  

    [89]
   

  are generally capital intensive. They have a significant physical footprint, requiring allocations of space, hardware, and environmental controls. These assets have to be refreshed periodically, resulting in additional capital expenditures. They have attracted criticism because users "still have to buy, build, and manage them" and thus do not benefit from less hands-on management,
  

    [90]
   

  essentially "[lacking] the economic model that makes cloud computing such an intriguing concept".
  

    [91]
   



    [92]
   


  A cloud is called a "public cloud" when the services are rendered over a network that is open for public use. Public cloud services may be free.
  

    [93]
   

  Technically there may be little or no difference between public and private cloud architecture, however, security consideration may be substantially different for services (applications, storage, and other resources) that are made available by a service provider for a public audience and when communication is effected over a non-trusted network. Generally, public cloud service providers like
  
   Amazon Web Services
  
  (AWS), Microsoft and Google own and operate the infrastructure at their
  
   data center
  
  and access is generally via the Internet. AWS and Microsoft also offer direct connect services called "AWS Direct Connect" and "Azure ExpressRoute" respectively, such connections require customers to purchase or lease a private connection to a peering point offered by the cloud provider.
  

    [45]
   


  Hybrid cloud is a composition of two or more clouds (private, community or public) that remain distinct entities but are bound together, offering the benefits of multiple deployment models. Hybrid cloud can also mean the ability to connect collocation, managed and/or dedicated services with cloud resources.
  

    [2]
   


   Gartner, Inc.
  
  defines a hybrid cloud service as a cloud computing service that is composed of some combination of private, public and community cloud services, from different service providers.
  

    [94]
   

  A hybrid cloud service crosses isolation and provider boundaries so that it can't be simply put in one category of private, public, or community cloud service. It allows one to extend either the capacity or the capability of a cloud service, by aggregation, integration or customization with another cloud service.
 
  Varied use cases for hybrid cloud composition exist. For example, an organization may store sensitive client data in house on a private cloud application, but interconnect that application to a business intelligence application provided on a public cloud as a software service.
  

    [95]
   

  This example of hybrid cloud extends the capabilities of the enterprise to deliver a specific business service through the addition of externally available public cloud services. Hybrid cloud adoption depends on a number of factors such as data security and compliance requirements, level of control needed over data, and the applications an organization uses.
  

    [96]
   


  Another example of hybrid cloud is one where
  
   IT
  
  organizations use public cloud computing resources to meet temporary capacity needs that can not be met by the private cloud.
  

    [97]
   

  This capability enables hybrid clouds to employ cloud bursting for scaling across clouds.
  

    [2]
   

  Cloud bursting is an application deployment model in which an application runs in a private cloud or data center and "bursts" to a public cloud when the demand for computing capacity increases. A primary advantage of cloud bursting and a hybrid cloud model is that an organization pays for extra compute resources only when they are needed.
  

    [98]
   

  Cloud bursting enables data centers to create an in-house IT infrastructure that supports average workloads, and use cloud resources from public or private clouds, during spikes in processing demands.
  

    [99]
   

  The specialized model of hybrid cloud, which is built atop heterogeneous hardware, is called "Cross-platform Hybrid Cloud". A cross-platform hybrid cloud is usually powered by different CPU architectures, for example, x86-64 and ARM, underneath. Users can transparently deploy and scale applications without knowledge of the cloud's hardware diversity.
  

    [100]
   

  This kind of cloud emerges from the raise of ARM-based system-on-chip for server-class computing.
 

   Community cloud
  
  shares infrastructure between several organizations from a specific community with common concerns (security, compliance, jurisdiction, etc.), whether managed internally or by a third-party, and either hosted internally or externally. The costs are spread over fewer users than a public cloud (but more than a private cloud), so only some of the cost savings potential of cloud computing are realized.
  

    [2]
   


  A cloud computing platform can be assembled from a distributed set of machines in different locations, connected to a single network or hub service. It is possible to distinguish between two types of distributed clouds: public-resource computing and volunteer cloud.
 
  The
  
   Intercloud
  


    [102]
   

  is an interconnected global "cloud of clouds"
  

    [103]
   



    [104]
   

  and an extension of the Internet "network of networks" on which it is based. The focus is on direct
  
   interoperability
  
  between public cloud service providers, more so than between providers and consumers (as is the case for hybrid- and multi-cloud).
  

    [105]
   



    [106]
   



    [107]
   


  Multicloud is the use of multiple cloud computing services in a single heterogeneous architecture to reduce reliance on single vendors, increase flexibility through choice, mitigate against disasters, etc. It differs from hybrid cloud in that it refers to multiple cloud services, rather than multiple deployment modes (public, private, legacy).
  

    [108]
   



    [109]
   



    [110]
   



   Cloud architecture
  
  ,
  

    [111]
   

  the
  
   systems architecture
  
  of the
  
   software systems
  
  involved in the delivery of cloud computing, typically involves multiple
  
   cloud components
  
  communicating with each other over a loose coupling mechanism such as a messaging queue. Elastic provision implies intelligence in the use of tight or loose coupling as applied to mechanisms such as these and others.
 


    Cloud engineering
   

  is the application of
  
   engineering
  
  disciplines to cloud computing. It brings a systematic approach to the high-level concerns of commercialization, standardization, and governance in conceiving, developing, operating and maintaining cloud computing systems. It is a multidisciplinary method encompassing contributions from diverse areas such as
  
   systems
  
  ,
  
   software
  
  ,
  
   web
  
  ,
  
   performance
  
  ,
  
   information
  
  ,
  
   security
  
  ,
  
   platform
  
  ,
  
   risk
  
  , and
  
   quality
  
  engineering.
 
  Cloud computing poses privacy concerns because the service provider can access the data that is in the cloud at any time. It could accidentally or deliberately alter or even delete information.
  

    [112]
   

  Many cloud providers can share information with third parties if necessary for purposes of law and order even without a warrant. That is permitted in their privacy policies, which users must agree to before they start using cloud services. Solutions to privacy include policy and legislation as well as end users' choices for how data is stored.
  

    [112]
   

  Users can encrypt data that is processed or stored within the cloud to prevent unauthorized access.
  

    [3]
   



    [112]
   


  According to the
  
   Cloud Security Alliance
  
  , the top three threats in the cloud are
  
   Insecure Interfaces and API's
  
  ,
  
   Data Loss & Leakage
  
  , and
  
   Hardware Failure
  
  —which accounted for 29%, 25% and 10% of all cloud security outages respectively. Together, these form shared technology vulnerabilities. In a cloud provider platform being shared by different users there may be a possibility that information belonging to different customers resides on same data server. Therefore, Information leakage may arise by mistake when information for one customer is given to other.
  

    [113]
   

  Additionally,
  
   Eugene Schultz
  
  , chief technology officer at Emagined Security, said that hackers are spending substantial time and effort looking for ways to penetrate the cloud. "There are some real Achilles' heels in the cloud infrastructure that are making big holes for the bad guys to get into". Because data from hundreds or thousands of companies can be stored on large cloud servers, hackers can theoretically gain control of huge stores of information through a single attack—a process he called "hyperjacking". Some examples of this include the Dropbox security breach, and iCloud 2014 leak.
  

    [114]
   

  Dropbox had been breached in October 2014, having over 7 million of its users passwords stolen by hackers in an effort to get monetary value from it by Bitcoins (BTC). By having these passwords, they are able to read private data as well as have this data be indexed by search engines (making the information public).
  

    [114]
   


  There is the problem of legal ownership of the data (If a user stores some data in the cloud, can the cloud provider profit from it?). Many Terms of Service agreements are silent on the question of ownership.
  

    [115]
   

  Physical control of the computer equipment (private cloud) is more secure than having the equipment off site and under someone else's control (public cloud). This delivers great incentive to public cloud computing service providers to prioritize building and maintaining strong management of secure services.
  

    [116]
   

  Some small businesses that don't have expertise in
  
   IT
  
  security could find that it's more secure for them to use a public cloud. There is the risk that end users do not understand the issues involved when signing on to a cloud service (persons sometimes don't read the many pages of the terms of service agreement, and just click "Accept" without reading). This is important now that cloud computing is becoming popular and required for some services to work, for example for an
  
   intelligent personal assistant
  
  (Apple's
  
   Siri
  
  or
  
   Google Now
  
  ). Fundamentally, private cloud is seen as more secure with higher levels of control for the owner, however public cloud is seen to be more flexible and requires less time and money investment from the user.
  

    [117]
   


  According to
  
   Bruce Schneier
  
  , "The downside is that you will have limited customization options. Cloud computing is cheaper because of
  
   economics of scale
  
  , and — like any outsourced task — you tend to get what you get. A restaurant with a limited menu is cheaper than a personal chef who can cook anything you want. Fewer options at a much cheaper price: it's a feature, not a bug." He also suggests that "the cloud provider might not meet your legal needs" and that businesses need to weigh the benefits of cloud computing against the risks.
  

    [118]
   

  In cloud computing, the control of the back end infrastructure is limited to the cloud vendor only. Cloud providers often decide on the management policies, which moderates what the cloud users are able to do with their deployment.
  

    [119]
   

  Cloud users are also limited to the control and management of their applications, data and services.
  

    [120]
   

  This includes data caps, which are placed on cloud users by the cloud vendor allocating certain amount of bandwidth for each customer and are often shared among other cloud users.
  

    [121]
   


  Privacy and
  
   confidentiality
  
  are big concerns in some activities. For instance, sworn translators working under the stipulations of an
  
   NDA
  
  , might face problems regarding
  
   sensitive data
  
  that are not
  
   encrypted
  
  .
  

    [122]
   


  Cloud computing is still a subject of research.
  

    [123]
   

  A driving factor in the evolution of cloud computing has been
  
   Chief technology officers
  
  seeking to minimize risk of internal outages and mitigate the complexity of housing network and computing hardware in-house.
  

    [124]
   

  Major cloud technology companies invest billions of dollars per year in cloud
  
   Research and Development
  
  . For example, in 2011 Microsoft committed 90 percent of its $9.6 billion
  
   R&D
  
  budget to its cloud.
  

    [125]
   

  Research by investment bank Centaur Partners in late 2015 forecasted that
  
   SaaS
  
  revenue would grow from $13.5 billion in 2011 to $32.8 billion in 2016.
  

    [126]
   



