


   Berkeley Software Distribution
  
  (
  
   BSD
  
  ) is a
  
   Unix
  

   operating system
  
  derivative developed and distributed by the
  
   Computer Systems Research Group
  
  (CSRG) of the
  
   University of California, Berkeley
  
  , from 1977 to 1995. Today the term "BSD" is often used non-specifically to refer to any of the BSD descendants which together form a branch of the family of
  
   Unix-like
  
  operating systems. Operating systems derived from the original BSD
  
   code
  
  remain actively developed and widely used.
 
  Historically, BSD has been considered a branch of Unix,
  
   Berkeley Unix
  
  , because it shared the initial codebase and design with the original
  
   AT&T
  
  Unix operating system. In the 1980s, BSD was widely adopted by vendors of
  
   workstation
  
  -class systems in the form of proprietary Unix variants such as
  
   DEC
  

   ULTRIX
  
  and
  
   Sun Microsystems
  

   SunOS
  
  . This can be attributed to the ease with which it could be licensed, and the familiarity the founders of many technology companies of the time had with it.
 
  Although these proprietary BSD derivatives were largely superseded by the UNIX
  
   System V Release 4
  
  and
  
   OSF/1
  
  systems in the 1990s (both of which incorporated BSD code and are the basis of other modern Unix systems), later BSD releases provided a basis for several
  
   open source
  
  development projects that are ongoing, e.g.,
  
   FreeBSD
  
  ,
  
   OpenBSD
  
  ,
  
   NetBSD
  
  ,
  
   Darwin,
  
  and
  
   PC-BSD
  
  . These, in turn, have been incorporated in whole or in part in modern proprietary operating systems, e.g., the
  
   TCP/IP
  
  networking code in
  
   Windows NT 3.1
  
  and most of the foundation of
  
   Apple
  
  's
  
   macOS
  
  and
  
   iOS
  
  .
 


  The
  
   earliest distributions
  
  of Unix from
  
   Bell Labs
  
  in the 1970s included the
  
   source code
  
  to the operating system, allowing researchers at universities to modify and extend Unix. The operating system arrived at Berkeley in 1974, at the request of computer science professor
  
   Bob Fabry
  
  who had been on the program committee for the
  
   Symposium on Operating Systems Principles
  
  where Unix was first presented. A
  
   PDP-11/45
  
  was bought to run the system, but for budgetary reasons, this machine was shared with the mathematics and statistics groups at Berkeley, who used
  
   RSTS
  
  , so that Unix only ran on the machine eight hours per day (sometimes during the day, sometimes during the night). A larger
  
   PDP-11/70
  
  was installed at Berkeley the following year, using money from the
  
   Ingres
  
  database project.
  

    [1]
   


  Also in 1975,
  
   Ken Thompson
  
  took a
  
   sabbatical
  
  from Bell Labs and came to Berkeley as a visiting professor. He helped to install
  
   Version 6 Unix
  
  and started working on a
  
   Pascal
  
  implementation for the system. Graduate students Chuck Haley and
  
   Bill Joy
  
  improved Thompson's Pascal and implemented an improved text editor,
  
   ex
  
  .
  

    [1]
   

  Other universities became interested in the software at Berkeley, and so in 1977 Joy started compiling the first Berkeley Software Distribution (1BSD), which was released on March 9, 1978.
  

    [2]
   

  1BSD was an add-on to Version 6 Unix rather than a complete operating system in its own right. Some thirty copies were sent out.
  

    [1]
   


  The Second Berkeley Software Distribution (2BSD), released in May 1979,
  

    [3]
   

  included updated versions of the 1BSD software as well as two new programs by Joy that persist on Unix systems to this day: the
  
   vi
  
  text editor (a
  
   visual
  
  version of
  
   ex
  
  ) and the
  
   C shell
  
  . Some 75 copies of 2BSD were sent out by Bill Joy.
  

    [1]
   

  A further feature was a networking package called
  
   Berknet
  
  , developed by
  
   Eric Schmidt
  
  as part of his
  
   master's thesis
  
  work, that could connect up to twenty-six computers and provided email and file transfer.
  

    [4]
   


  After 3BSD (see below) had come out for the
  
   VAX
  
  line of computers, new releases of 2BSD for the PDP-11 were still issued and distributed through
  
   USENIX
  
  ; for example, 1982's 2.8.1BSD included a collection of fixes for performance problems in
  
   Version 7 Unix
  
  ,
  

    [5]
   

  and later releases contained ports of changes from the VAX-based releases of BSD back to the PDP-11 architecture. 2.9BSD from 1983 included code from 4.1cBSD, and was the first release that was a full OS (a modified V7 Unix) rather than a set of applications and patches. The most recent release, 2.11BSD, was first issued in 1992. As of 2008, maintenance updates from volunteers are still continuing, with patch 448 being released on June 17, 2012.
 
  A VAX computer was installed at Berkeley in 1978, but the
  
   port
  
  of Unix to the VAX architecture,
  
   UNIX/32V
  
  , did not take advantage of the VAX's
  
   virtual memory
  
  capabilities. The
  
   kernel
  
  of 32V was largely rewritten by Berkeley students to include a virtual memory implementation, and a complete operating system including the new kernel, ports of the 2BSD utilities to the VAX, and the utilities from 32V was released as 3BSD at the end of 1979. 3BSD was also alternatively called Virtual VAX/UNIX or VMUNIX (for Virtual Memory Unix), and BSD kernel images were normally called
  
   /vmunix
  
  until 4.4BSD.
 
  The success of 3BSD was a major factor in the
  
   Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency
  
  's (DARPA) decision to fund Berkeley's
  
   Computer Systems Research Group
  
  (CSRG), which would develop a standard Unix platform for future DARPA research in the
  
   VLSI Project
  
  .
 
  4BSD (November 1980) offered a number of enhancements over 3BSD, notably
  
   job control
  
  in the previously released
  
   csh
  
  ,
  
   delivermail
  
  (the antecedent of
  
   sendmail
  
  ), "reliable"
  
   signals
  
  , and the
  
   Curses
  
  programming library. In a 1985 review of BSD releases,
  
   John Quarterman
  

   et al.
  
  , wrote:
  

    [6]
   


   4BSD was the operating system of choice for VAXs from the beginning until the release of
   
    System III
   
   (1979–1982) [...] Most organizations would buy a 32V license and order 4BSD from Berkeley without ever bothering to get a 32V tape. Many installations inside the
   
    Bell System
   
   ran 4.1BSD (many still do, and many others run 4.2BSD).
  
  4.1BSD (June 1981) was a response to criticisms of BSD's performance relative to the dominant VAX operating system,
  
   VMS
  
  . The 4.1BSD kernel was systematically tuned up by
  
   Bill Joy
  
  until it could perform as well as VMS on several benchmarks. The release would have been called
  
   5BSD
  
  , but after objections from
  
   AT&T
  
  the name was changed; AT&T feared confusion with
  
   AT&T
  
  's
  
   UNIX System V
  
  .
  

    [7]
   


  4.2BSD (August 1983) would take over two years to implement and contained several major overhauls. Before its official release came three intermediate versions:
  
   4.1a
  
  incorporated a modified version of
  
   BBN's
  
  preliminary
  
   TCP/IP
  
  implementation;
  
   4.1b
  
  included the new
  
   Berkeley Fast File System
  
  , implemented by
  
   Marshall Kirk McKusick
  
  ; and
  
   4.1c
  
  was an interim release during the last few months of 4.2BSD's development. Back at Bell Labs, 4.1cBSD became the basis of the
  
   8th Edition
  
  of
  
   Research Unix
  
  , and a commercially supported version was available from
  
   mtXinu
  
  .
 
  To guide the design of 4.2BSD,
  
   Duane Adams
  
  of
  
   DARPA
  
  formed a "steering committee" consisting of
  
   Bob Fabry
  
  ,
  
   Bill Joy
  
  and
  
   Sam Leffler
  
  from
  
   UCB
  
  ,
  
   Alan Nemeth
  
  and
  
   Rob Gurwitz
  
  from
  
   BBN
  
  ,
  
   Dennis Ritchie
  
  from
  
   Bell Labs
  
  ,
  
   Keith Lantz
  
  from
  
   Stanford
  
  ,
  
   Rick Rashid
  
  from
  
   Carnegie-Mellon
  
  ,
  
   Bert Halstead
  
  from
  
   MIT
  
  ,
  
   Dan Lynch
  
  from
  
   ISI
  
  , and
  
   Gerald J. Popek
  
  of
  
   UCLA
  
  . The committee met from April 1981 to June 1983.
 
  Apart from the Fast File System, several features from outside contributors were accepted, including disk quotas and job control.
  
   Sun Microsystems
  
  provided testing on its
  
   Motorola 68000
  
  machines prior to release, ensuring portability of the system.
  

    [6]
   


  The official 4.2BSD release came in August 1983. It was notable as the first version released after the 1982 departure of Bill Joy to co-found Sun Microsystems;
  
   Mike Karels
  
  and
  
   Marshall Kirk McKusick
  
  took on leadership roles within the project from that point forward. On a lighter note, it also marked the debut of
  
   BSD's daemon mascot
  
  in a drawing by
  
   John Lasseter
  
  that appeared on the cover of the printed manuals distributed by
  
   USENIX
  
  .
 
  4.3BSD was released in June 1986. Its main changes were to improve the performance of many of the new contributions of 4.2BSD that had not been as heavily tuned as the 4.1BSD code. Prior to the release, BSD's implementation of TCP/IP had diverged considerably from BBN's official implementation. After several months of testing, DARPA determined that the 4.2BSD version was superior and would remain in 4.3BSD. (See also
  
   History of the Internet
  
  .)
 
  After 4.3BSD, it was determined that BSD would move away from the aging VAX platform. The
  
   Power 6/32
  
  platform (codenamed "Tahoe") developed by
  
   Computer Consoles Inc.
  
  seemed promising at the time, but was abandoned by its developers shortly thereafter. Nonetheless, the
  
   4.3BSD-Tahoe
  
  port (June 1988) proved valuable, as it led to a separation of machine-dependent and machine-independent code in BSD which would improve the system's future portability.
 
  Apart from portability, the CSRG worked on an implementation of the
  
   OSI
  
  network protocol stack, improvements to the kernel virtual memory system and (with
  
   Van Jacobson
  
  of
  
   LBL
  
  ) new TCP/IP algorithms to accommodate the growth of the Internet.
  

    [8]
   


  Until then, all versions of BSD incorporated proprietary AT&T Unix code and were, therefore, subject to an AT&T software license. Source code licenses had become very expensive and several outside parties had expressed interest in a separate release of the networking code, which had been developed entirely outside AT&T and would not be subject to the licensing requirement. This led to
  
   Networking Release 1
  
  (
  
   Net/1
  
  ), which was made available to non-licensees of AT&T code and was
  
   freely redistributable
  
  under the terms of the
  
   BSD license
  
  . It was released in June 1989.
 

   4.3BSD-Reno
  
  came in early 1990. It was an interim release during the early development of 4.4BSD, and its use was considered a "gamble", hence the naming after the gambling center of
  
   Reno, Nevada
  
  . This release was explicitly moving towards
  
   POSIX
  
  compliance,
  

    [8]
   

  and, according to some, away from the BSD philosophy (as POSIX is very much based on System V, and Reno was quite bloated compared to previous releases
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  ). Among the new features were an
  
   NFS
  
  implementation from the
  
   University of Guelph
  
  and support for the
  
   HP 9000
  
  range of computers, originating in the
  
   University of Utah
  
  's "HPBSD" port.
  

    [9]
   


  In August 2006,
  

    InformationWeek
   

  magazine rated 4.3BSD as the "Greatest Software Ever Written".
  

    [10]
   

  They commented: "BSD 4.3 represents the single biggest theoretical undergirder of the Internet."
 
  After Net/1, BSD developer
  
   Keith Bostic
  
  proposed that more non-AT&T sections of the BSD system be released under the same license as Net/1. To this end, he started a project to reimplement most of the standard Unix utilities without using the AT&T code. For example,
  
   vi
  
  , which had been based on the original Unix version of
  
   ed
  
  , was rewritten as
  
   nvi
  
  (new vi). Within eighteen months, all of the AT&T utilities had been replaced, and it was determined that only a few AT&T files remained in the kernel. These files were removed, and the result was the June 1991 release of Networking Release 2 (Net/2), a nearly complete operating system that was freely distributable.
 
  Net/2 was the basis for two separate ports of BSD to the
  
   Intel 80386
  
  architecture: the free
  
   386BSD
  
  by
  
   William Jolitz
  
  and the
  
   proprietary
  

   BSD/386
  
  (later renamed BSD/OS) by
  
   Berkeley Software Design
  
  (BSDi). 386BSD itself was short-lived, but became the initial code base of the
  
   NetBSD
  
  and
  
   FreeBSD
  
  projects that were started shortly thereafter.
 
  BSDi soon found itself in legal trouble with AT&T's
  
   Unix System Laboratories
  
  (USL) subsidiary, then the owners of the System V
  
   copyright
  
  and the Unix trademark. The
  

    USL v. BSDi
   

  lawsuit was filed in 1992 and led to an
  
   injunction
  
  on the distribution of Net/2 until the validity of USL's copyright claims on the source could be determined.
 
  The lawsuit slowed development of the free-software descendants of BSD for nearly two years while their legal status was in question, and as a result systems based on the
  
   Linux kernel
  
  , which did not have such legal ambiguity, gained greater support. Although not released until 1992, development of
  
   386BSD
  
  predated that of Linux.
  
   Linus Torvalds
  
  has said that if 386BSD or the
  
   GNU kernel
  
  had been available at the time, he probably would not have created Linux.
  

    [11]
   



    [12]
   


  The lawsuit was settled in January 1994, largely in Berkeley's favor. Of the 18,000 files in the Berkeley distribution, only three had to be removed and 70 modified to show USL copyright notices. A further condition of the settlement was that USL would not file further lawsuits against users and distributors of the Berkeley-owned code in the upcoming 4.4BSD release. Marshall Kirk McKusick summarizes the lawsuit and its outcome:
  

    [13]
   


   Code copying and theft of trade secrets was alleged. The actual infringing code was not identified for nearly two years. The lawsuit could have dragged on for much longer but for the fact that
   
    Novell
   
   bought USL from AT&T and sought a settlement. In the end, three files were removed from the 18,000 that made up the distribution, and a number of minor changes were made to other files. In addition, the University agreed to add USL copyrights to about 70 files, with the stipulation that those files continued to be freely redistributed.
  
  In June 1994, 4.4BSD was released in two forms: the freely distributable
  
   4.4BSD-Lite
  
  contained no AT&T source, whereas
  
   4.4BSD-Encumbered
  
  was available, as earlier releases had been, only to AT&T licensees.
 
  The final release from Berkeley was 1995's
  
   4.4BSD-Lite Release 2
  
  , after which the CSRG was dissolved and development of BSD at Berkeley ceased. Since then, several variants based directly or indirectly on 4.4BSD-Lite (such as
  
   FreeBSD
  
  ,
  
   NetBSD
  
  ,
  
   OpenBSD
  
  and
  
   DragonFly BSD
  
  ) have been maintained.
 
  In addition, the permissive nature of the BSD license has allowed many other operating systems, both free and proprietary, to incorporate BSD code. For example,
  
   Microsoft Windows
  
  has used BSD-derived code in its implementation of TCP/IP
  

    [14]
   

  and bundles recompiled versions of BSD's
  
   command-line
  
  networking tools since
  
   Windows 2000
  
  .
  

    [15]
   

  Also
  
   Darwin
  
  , the system on which Apple's
  
   macOS
  
  is built, is a derivative of 4.4BSD-Lite2 and FreeBSD. Various commercial Unix operating systems, such as
  
   Solaris
  
  , also contain varying amounts of BSD code.
 
  Starting with the 8th Edition, versions of Research Unix at Bell Labs had a close relationship to BSD. This began when 4.1cBSD for the VAX was used as the basis for Research Unix 8th Edition. This continued in subsequent versions, such as the 9th Edition, which incorporated source code and improvements from 4.3BSD. The result was that these later versions of Research Unix were closer to BSD than they were to System V. In a
  
   Usenet
  
  posting from 2000, Dennis Ritchie described this relationship between BSD and Research Unix:
  

    [16]
   


   Research Unix 8th Edition started from (I think) BSD 4.1c, but with enormous amounts scooped out and replaced by our own stuff. This continued with 9th and 10th. The ordinary user command-set was, I guess, a bit more BSD-flavored than SysVish, but it was pretty eclectic.
  

   Eric S. Raymond
  
  summarizes the longstanding relationship between
  
   System V
  
  and BSD, stating, "The divide was roughly between longhairs and shorthairs;
  
   programmers
  
  and technical people tended to line up with Berkeley and BSD, more business-oriented types with AT&T and System V."
  

    [17]
   


  In 1989, David A. Curry wrote about the differences between BSD and System V. He characterized System V as being often regarded as the "standard Unix." However, he described BSD as more popular among university and government computer centers, due to its advanced features and performance:
  

    [18]
   


   Most university and government computer centers that use UNIX use Berkeley UNIX, rather than System V. There are several reasons for this, but perhaps the two most significant are that Berkeley UNIX provides networking capabilities that until recently (Release 3.0) were completely unavailable in System V, and that Berkeley UNIX is much more suited to a research environment, which requires a faster file system, better virtual memory handling, and a larger variety of
   
    programming languages
   
   .
  
  Berkeley's Unix was the first Unix to include libraries supporting the
  
   Internet Protocol
  
  stacks:
  

    Berkeley sockets
   

  . A Unix implementation of IP's predecessor, the ARPAnet's
  
   NCP
  
  , with
  
   FTP
  
  and
  
   Telnet
  
  clients, had been produced at
  
   U. Illinois
  
  in 1975, and was available at Berkeley.
  

    [19]
   



    [20]
   

  However, the memory scarcity on the PDP-11 forced a complicated design and performance problems.
  

    [6]
   


  By integrating sockets with the Unix operating system's
  
   file descriptors
  
  , it became almost as easy to read and write data across a
  
   network
  
  as it was to access a disk. The AT&T laboratory eventually released their own
  
   STREAMS
  
  library, which incorporated much of the same functionality in a software stack with a different architecture, but the wide distribution of the existing sockets library reduced the impact of the new
  
   API
  
  . Early versions of BSD were used to form
  
   Sun Microsystems
  
  '
  
   SunOS
  
  , founding the first wave of popular Unix workstations.
 
  BSD operating systems can run much native software of several other operating systems on the same
  
   architecture
  
  , using a binary
  
   compatibility layer
  
  . Much simpler and faster than
  
   emulation
  
  , this allows, for instance, applications intended for
  
   Linux
  
  to be run at effectively full speed. This makes BSDs not only suitable for server environments, but also for workstation ones, given the increasing availability of commercial or closed-source software for Linux only. This also allows administrators to migrate legacy commercial applications, which may have only supported commercial Unix variants, to a more modern operating system, retaining the functionality of such applications until they can be replaced by a better alternative.
 
  Current BSD operating system variants support many of the common
  
   IEEE
  
  ,
  
   ANSI
  
  ,
  
   ISO
  
  , and
  
   POSIX
  
  standards, while retaining most of the traditional BSD behavior. Like
  
   AT&T Unix
  
  , the BSD kernel is
  
   monolithic
  
  , meaning that device drivers in the kernel run in
  
   privileged mode
  
  , as part of the core of the operating system.
 
  BSD has been the base of a large number of operating systems. Most notable among these today are perhaps the major
  
   open source
  
  BSDs: FreeBSD, NetBSD and OpenBSD, which are all derived from
  
   386BSD
  
  and
  
   4.4BSD
  
  -Lite by various routes. Both NetBSD and FreeBSD started life in 1993, initially derived from 386BSD, but in 1994 migrating to a 4.4BSD-Lite code base. OpenBSD was
  
   forked
  
  in 1995 from NetBSD. The three most notable descendants in current use—sometimes known as
  
   the BSDs
  
  —have themselves spawned a number of children, including
  
   DragonFly BSD
  
  ,
  
   FreeSBIE
  
  ,
  
   MirOS BSD
  
  ,
  
   DesktopBSD
  
  , and
  
   PC-BSD
  
  . They are targeted at an array of systems for different purposes and are common in government facilities, universities and in commercial use. A number of commercial operating systems are also partly or wholly based on BSD or its descendants, including
  
   Sun's
  

   SunOS
  
  and
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  's
  
   macOS
  
  .
 
  Most of the current BSD operating systems are
  
   open source
  
  and available for download, free of charge, under the
  
   BSD License
  
  , the most notable exception being
  
   macOS
  
  . They also generally use a
  
   monolithic kernel
  
  architecture, apart from macOS and DragonFly BSD which feature
  
   hybrid kernels
  
  . The various open source BSD projects generally develop the kernel and
  
   userland
  
  programs and libraries together, the source code being managed using a single central source repository.
 
  In the past, BSD was also used as a basis for several proprietary versions of Unix, such as
  
   Sun
  
  's
  
   SunOS
  
  ,
  
   Sequent
  
  's
  
   Dynix
  
  ,
  
   NeXT
  
  's
  
   NeXTSTEP
  
  ,
  
   DEC
  
  's
  
   Ultrix
  
  and OSF/1 AXP (now
  
   Tru64 UNIX
  
  ). Parts of NeXT's software became the foundation for
  
   macOS
  
  , among the most commercially successful BSD variants in the general market.
 
  A selection of significant Unix versions and
  
   Unix-like
  
  operating systems that descend from BSD includes:
 