


   Digital Equipment Corporation
  
  , also known as
  
   DEC
  
  and using the
  
   trademark
  

   Digital
  
  , was a major American company in the
  
   computer industry
  
  from the 1950s to the 1990s.
 
  DEC was a leading vendor of computer systems, including computers, software, and
  
   peripherals
  
  . Their
  
   PDP
  
  and successor
  
   VAX
  
  products were the most successful of all
  
   minicomputers
  
  in terms of sales.
 
  DEC was acquired in June 1998 by
  
   Compaq
  
  , in what was at that time the largest merger in the history of the computer industry. At the time, Compaq was focused on the enterprise market and had recently purchased several other large vendors. DEC was a major player overseas where Compaq had less presence. However, Compaq had little idea what to do with its acquisitions, and soon found itself in financial difficulty of its own. The company subsequently merged with
  
   Hewlett-Packard
  
  (HP) in May 2002. As of 2007
  

    [update]
   

  some of DEC's product lines were still produced under the HP name.
 


  From 1957 until 1992, DEC's headquarters were located in a former wool mill in
  
   Maynard, Massachusetts
  
  (since renamed Clock Tower Place, and now home to many companies). DEC was acquired in June 1998 by
  
   Compaq
  
  , which subsequently merged with
  
   Hewlett-Packard
  
  (HP) in May 2002. Some parts of DEC, notably the compiler business and the
  
   Hudson, Massachusetts
  
  facility, were sold to
  
   Intel
  
  .
 
  Initially focusing on the small end of the computer market allowed DEC to grow without its potential competitors making serious efforts to compete with them. Their PDP series of machines became popular in the 1960s, especially the
  
   PDP-8
  
  , widely considered to be the first successful
  
   minicomputer
  
  . Looking to simplify and update their line, DEC replaced most of their smaller machines with the
  
   PDP-11
  
  in 1970, eventually selling over 600,000 units and cementing DEC's position in the industry.
 
  Originally designed as a follow-on to the PDP-11, DEC's
  
   VAX-11
  
  series was the first widely used
  
   32-bit
  
  minicomputer, sometimes referred to as "
  
   superminis
  
  ". These systems were able to compete in many roles with larger
  
   mainframe computers
  
  , such as the
  
   IBM System/370
  
  . The VAX was a best-seller, with over 400,000 sold, and its sales through the 1980s propelled the company into the second largest computer company in the industry. At its peak, DEC was the second largest employer in Massachusetts, second only to the Massachusetts State Government.
 
  The rapid rise of the business
  
   microcomputer
  
  in the late 1980s, and especially the introduction of powerful 32-bit systems in the 1990s, quickly eroded the value of DEC's systems. DEC's last major attempt to find a space in the rapidly changing market was the
  
   DEC Alpha
  

   64-bit
  

   RISC
  

   instruction set architecture
  
  . DEC initially started work on Alpha as a way to re-implement their VAX series, but also employed it in a range of high-performance
  
   workstations
  
  . Although the Alpha processor family met both of these goals, and, for most of its lifetime, was the fastest processor family on the market, extremely high asking prices
  

    [1]
   


   [
   


      better source needed
     


   ]
  
  were outsold by lower priced x86 chips from Intel and clones such as AMD.
 
  DEC was acquired in June 1998 by
  
   Compaq
  
  , in what was at that time the largest merger in the history of the computer industry. At the time, Compaq was focused on the enterprise market and had recently purchased several other large vendors. DEC was a major player overseas where Compaq had less presence. However, Compaq had little idea what to do with its acquisitions, and soon found itself in financial difficulty of its own. The company subsequently merged with
  
   Hewlett-Packard
  
  (HP) in May 2002. As of 2007
  

    [update]
   

  some of DEC's product lines were still produced under the HP name.
 
  Beyond DECsystem-10/20, PDP, VAX and Alpha, DEC was well respected for its communication subsystem designs, such as
  
   Ethernet
  
  , DNA (
  
   DIGITAL Network Architecture
  
  : predominantly DECnet products), DSA (Digital Storage Architecture: disks/tapes/controllers), and its "dumb terminal" subsystems including VT100 and DECserver products.
  

    [2]
   


  DEC's Research Laboratories (or Research Labs, as they were commonly known) conducted DEC's corporate research. Some of them were operated by
  
   Compaq
  
  and are still operated by
  
   Hewlett-Packard
  
  . The laboratories were:
 
  Some of the former employees of DEC's Research Labs or DEC's R&D in general include:
 
  Some of the former employees of Digital Equipment Corp who were responsible for developing Alpha and StrongARM:
 
  Some of the work of the Research Labs was published in the
  
   Digital Technical Journal
  
  ,
  

    [3]
   

  which was in published from 1985 until 1998.
  

    [4]
   


  DEC supported the
  
   ANSI
  
  standards, especially the
  
   ASCII
  
  character set, which survives in
  
   Unicode
  
  and the
  
   ISO 8859
  
  character set family. DEC's own
  
   Multinational Character Set
  
  also had a large influence on
  
   ISO 8859-1
  
  (Latin-1) and, by extension, Unicode.
 
  The first versions of the
  
   C
  
  language and the
  
   Unix
  
  operating system ran on DEC's
  
   PDP
  
  series of computers (first on a PDP-7, then the
  
   PDP-11
  
  's), which were among the first commercially viable
  
   minicomputers
  
  , although for several years DEC itself did not encourage the use of Unix.
 
  DEC produced widely used and influential interactive operating systems, including
  
   OS-8
  
  ,
  
   TOPS-10
  
  ,
  
   TOPS-20
  
  ,
  
   RSTS/E
  
  ,
  
   RSX-11
  
  ,
  
   RT-11
  
  , and
  
   OpenVMS
  
  . PDP computers, in particular the
  
   PDP-11
  
  model, inspired a generation of programmers and software developers. Some PDP-11 systems more than 25 years old (software and hardware) are still being used to control and monitor factories, transportation systems and nuclear plants. DEC was an early champion of
  
   time-sharing
  
  systems.
 
  The command-line interfaces found in DEC's systems, eventually codified as
  
   DCL
  
  , would look familiar to any user of modern microcomputer CLIs; those used in earlier systems, such as
  
   CTSS
  
  ,
  
   IBM
  
  's
  
   JCL
  
  , or
  
   Univac
  
  's time-sharing systems, would look utterly alien. Many features of the
  
   CP/M
  
  and MS-DOS
  
   CLI
  
  show a recognizable family resemblance to DEC's OSes, including command names such as DIR and HELP and the "name-dot-extension" file naming conventions.
 
  VAX and
  
   MicroVAX
  
  computers (very widespread in the 1980s) running
  
   VMS
  
  formed one of the most important proprietary networks,
  
   DECnet
  
  , which linked business and research facilities. The
  
   DECnet
  
  protocols formed one of the first peer-to-peer networking standards, with DECnet phase I being released in the mid-1970s. Email, file sharing, and distributed collaborative projects existed within the company long before their value was recognized in the market.
 
  DEC,
  
   Intel
  
  and
  
   Xerox
  
  through their collaboration to create the DIX standard, were champions of
  
   Ethernet
  
  , but DEC is the company that made Ethernet commercially successful. Initially, Ethernet-based DECnet and
  
   LAT
  
  protocols interconnected VAXes with
  
   DECserver
  

   terminal servers
  
  . Starting with the
  
   Unibus
  
  to Ethernet adapter, multiple generations of Ethernet hardware from DEC were the de facto standard. The CI "computer interconnect" adapter was the industry's first network interface controller to use separate transmit and receive "rings".
 
  DEC also invented
  
   clustering
  
  , an operating system technology that treated multiple machines as one logical entity. Clustering permitted sharing of pooled disk and tape storage via the HSC50/70/90 and later series of Hierarchical Storage Controllers (HSC). The HSCs delivered the first hardware
  
   RAID 0
  
  and
  
   RAID 1
  
  capabilities and the first serial interconnects of multiple storage technologies. This technology was the forerunner to architectures such as
  
   Network of Workstations
  
  which are used for massively cooperative tasks such as web-searches and drug research.
 
  The LA36 and LA120
  
   dot matrix printers
  
  became industry standards and may have hastened the demise of the
  
   Teletype Corporation
  
  .
 
  The
  
   VT100
  

   computer terminal
  
  became the industry standard, implementing a useful subset of the
  
   ANSI X3.64
  
  standard, and even today terminal emulators such as
  
   HyperTerminal
  
  ,
  
   PuTTY
  
  and
  
   Xterm
  
  still emulate a VT100 (or its more capable successor, the
  
   VT220
  
  ).
 
  The
  
   X Window System
  
  , the network transparent window system used on
  
   UNIX
  
  and
  
   Linux
  
  , and also available on other operating systems, was developed at
  
   MIT
  
  jointly between
  
   Project Athena
  
  and the
  
   Laboratory for Computer Science
  
  . DEC was the primary sponsor for this project, which was a contemporary of the
  
   GNU Project
  
  but not associated with it.
 
  In the period 1994–99
  
   Linus Torvalds
  
  developed versions of Linux on early
  
   AlphaServer
  
  systems made available to him by the engineering department.
  
   [
   


      disputed
     


     –
     
      discuss
     


   ]
  
  Compaq software engineers developed special Linux kernel modules.
  

    [5]
   

  A well-known
  
   Linux distribution
  
  that ran on AlphaServer systems was
  
   Red Hat
  
  7.2.
  

    [6]
   

  Another distribution that ran on Alpha was
  
   Gentoo Linux
  
  .
 
  Microsoft was not exclusively bound to the Alpha chip so it pursued other processor makers such as IBM with the
  
   PowerPC
  
  architecture and eventually capitalized on the emerging strength of the Intel x86-based processors.
 

   Notes-11
  
  and its follow-on product,
  


   VAX Notes
  
  , were two of the first examples of online collaboration software, a category that has become to be known as
  
   groupware
  
  .
  
   Len Kawell
  
  , one of the original Notes-11 developers later joined
  
   Lotus Development Corporation
  
  and contributed to their
  
   Lotus Notes
  
  product.
 
  DEC was one of the first businesses connected to the Internet, with
  
   dec.com
  
  , registered in 1985,
  

    [7]
   

  being one of the first of the now ubiquitous
  
   .com
  
  domains. DEC's
  
   gatekeeper.dec.com
  
  was a well-known
  
   software repository
  
  during the pre-
  
   World Wide Web
  
  days, and DEC was also the first computer vendor to open a public website, on 1 October 1993.
  

    [8]
   

  The popular
  
   AltaVista
  
  , created by DEC, was one of the first comprehensive Internet
  
   search engines
  
  . (Although
  
   Lycos
  
  was earlier, it was much more limited.)
 
  DEC invented
  
   Digital Linear Tape
  
  (DLT), formerly known as CompacTape, which began as a compact backup medium for MicroVAX systems, and later grew to capacities of 800 gigabytes.
 
  Work on the first hard-disk-based MP3-player, the
  
   Personal Jukebox
  
  , started at the
  
   DEC Systems Research Center
  
  . (The project was started about a month before the merger into
  
   Compaq
  
  was completed.)
 
  DEC's Western Research Lab created the
  
   Itsy Pocket Computer
  
  . This was developed into the Compaq
  
   iPaq
  
  line of
  
   PDAs
  
  , which replaced the
  
   Compaq Aero
  
  PDA.
 

   Digital Federal Credit Union
  
  (DCU) is a
  
   credit union
  
  which was chartered in 1979 for employees of DEC. Today its field of membership is open to existing family members, over 900 different sponsors, several communities in Massachusetts and several organizations. DCU has over 700 different sponsors, including the companies that acquired pieces of DEC.
 
  DEC once held the
  
   Class A
  

   IP address
  
  block 16.0.0.0/8.
  

    [9]
   


  Originally the
  
   users' group
  
  was called
  
   DECUS
  
  (Digital Equipment Computer User Society) during the 1960s to 1990s. When
  
   Compaq
  
  acquired DEC in 1998, the users group was renamed CUO, the Compaq Users' Organisation. When
  
   HP
  
  acquired
  
   Compaq
  
  in 2002, CUO became
  
   HP-Interex
  
  , although there are still DECUS groups in several countries. In the United States, the organization is represented by the
  
   Encompass
  
  organization; currently
  
   Connect
  
  .
 

