


   iMac
  
  is a range of
  
   all-in-one
  

   Macintosh
  

   desktop computers
  
  designed and built by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  It has been the primary part of Apple's consumer desktop offerings since its debut in August 1998, and has evolved through
  
   six distinct forms
  
  .
  

    [1]
   


  In its original form,
  
   iMac G3
  
  had a
  
   gumdrop
  
  or
  
   egg-shaped
  
  look, with a
  
   CRT
  
  monitor, mainly enclosed by a colored,
  
   translucent
  
  plastic case, which was refreshed early on with a sleeker design notable for its
  
   slot-loaded optical drive
  
  . The second major revision,
  
   iMac G4
  
  , moved the design to a hemispherical base containing all the main components and an
  
   LCD
  
  monitor on a freely moving arm attached to it. The third and fourth major revisions,
  
   iMac G5
  
  and the
  
   Intel iMac
  
  respectively, placed all the components immediately behind the display, creating a slim unified design that tilts only up and down on a simple metal base. The fifth major revision (Summer 2007) shared the same form as the previous model, but was thinner and used
  
   anodized aluminum
  
  and a glass panel over the entire front. The sixth major revision (Fall 2012) uses a different display unit, omits the
  
   SuperDrive
  
  , and uses different production techniques from the older unibody versions. This allows it to be thinner at the edge than older models, with an edge thickness of 5.9mm (but the same maximum depth). It also includes a dual microphone setup, and includes
  
   solid-state drive
  
  (SSD) or hard disk storage, or an Apple
  
   Fusion Drive
  
  , a hybrid of solid state and hard disk drives. This version of iMac was announced in October 2012, with the 21.5-inch (55 cm) version released in November and the 27-inch (69 cm) version in December; these were refreshed in September 2013, with new
  
   Haswell
  
  processors, faster graphics, faster and larger SSD options and
  
   802.11ac
  
  WiFi cards.
  

    [2]
   


  In October 2014, the seventh major revision of the 27-inch (69 cm) iMac was announced, whose main feature is a "
  
   Retina
  
  5K" display at a resolution of 5120 × 2880 pixels. The new model also includes a new processor, graphics chip, and IO, along with several new storage options.
  

    [3]
   

  The seventh major revision of the 21.5-inch (55 cm) iMac was announced in October 2015. Its main feature is a "
  
   Retina
  
  4K" display at a resolution of 4096 × 2304 pixels. It has the same new processor, graphics chip, and IO as the 27-inch iMac, along with several new storage options.
  

    [4]
   




  The announcement of iMac in 1998 was a source of controversy and anticipation among commentators, Mac fans, and detractors. Opinions were divided over Apple's drastic changes to the Macintosh hardware. At the time, Apple had suffered a series of setbacks as consumers increasingly opted for
  
   Wintel
  
  (Windows PCs) machines instead of Apple's
  
   Performa
  
  models. Many in the industry thought that "beleaguered Apple" would soon be forced to start selling computers with a custom interface built on top of one or more potential operating system bases, such as
  
   Taligent
  
  ,
  
   Solaris
  
  , or
  
   Windows 98
  
  .
  

    [5]
   


  Part of Apple's effort to maintain the Mac platform was trying to improve its retail strategy; to this end, Apple secured a deal with
  
   CompUSA
  
  to set up a "store within a store" section at many CompUSA locations.
  

    [6]
   

  As these stores developed, however, they became a detriment to Apple sales, as CompUSA employees were unfamiliar with the Macintosh and directed customers to Wintel boxes instead.
  

    [7]
   


  The designer behind iMac's case was
  
   Jonathan Ive
  
  .
  

    [8]
   


  Ken Segall was an employee at an L.A. ad agency handling Apple's account who came up with the name "iMac" and pitched it to Steve Jobs. Jobs wanted the product to be called "MacMan", but eventually warmed to Segall's suggestion.
  

    [9]
   

  Segall says that the "i" stands for "
  
   Internet
  
  ",
  

    [10]
   

  but also represents the product as a personal and revolutionary device ('i' for "individuality" and "innovation").
  

    [11]
   

  Apple later
  
   adopted the 'i' prefix
  
  across its consumer hardware and software lines, such as
  
   iPod
  
  ,
  
   iBook
  
  (later MacBook),
  
   iPhone
  
  ,
  
   iPad
  
  and various pieces of software such as the
  
   iLife
  
  suite and
  
   iWork
  
  and the company's media player/store,
  
   iTunes
  
  .
 
  Attention was given to the
  
   out-of-box experience
  
  : the user needed to go through only two steps to set up and connect to the Internet. "There's no step 3!" was the catch-phrase in a popular iMac commercial narrated by actor
  
   Jeff Goldblum
  
  .
  

    [12]
   

  Another commercial, dubbed "Simplicity Shootout", pitted seven-year-old Johann Thomas and his
  
   border collie
  
  Brodie, with an iMac, against Adam Taggart, a
  
   Stanford University
  

   MBA
  
  student, with an
  
   HP
  
  Pavilion 8250, in a race to set up their computers. Johann and Brodie finished in 8 minutes and 15 seconds,
  

    [13]
   

  whereas Adam was still working on it by the end of the commercial.
 
  By 2005, it had become more and more apparent that IBM's development for the desktop implementation of PowerPC was grinding to a halt. Apple announced at the
  
   Worldwide Developers Conference
  
  that it would be
  
   switching the Macintosh to the x86 architecture
  
  and Intel's line of Core processors. The first Intel-equipped Macs were unveiled on January 10, 2006: the Intel iMac and the introductory MacBook Pro. Within nine months, Apple had smoothly transitioned the entire Macintosh line to Intel. One of the highly touted side benefits of this switch was the ability to run Windows on Mac hardware.
 
  On July 27, 2010, Apple updated its line of iMacs to feature the new Intel Core "i-series" processors across the line. The 21.5" models now feature the
  
   Core i3
  
  processor, but these are upgradable to the Core i5. The high end 27" features a
  
   Quad-Core i5
  
  processor, which is upgradable to a
  
   Quad-Core i7
  
  . On this date Apple also announced its new "
  
   Apple Magic Trackpad
  
  " peripheral, a trackpad similar to that of MacBook Pro for use with iMac or any other Apple computer. Apple also introduced a AA NiMH battery charger intended to simplify the use of batteries in these peripherals. Apple offers an option to use a solid state drive instead of a large mechanical drive.
 
  On May 3, 2011, Apple updated its iMac line with the introduction of Intel
  
   Thunderbolt
  
  technology and Intel Core
  
   i5
  
  and
  
   i7
  

   Sandy Bridge
  
  processors as well as a 1 mega pixel
  
   high definition
  

   FaceTime
  
  camera, features which were first introduced in the
  
   MacBook Pro
  
  line in February 2011.
  

    [14]
   


  On October 23, 2012, a new iMac was announced (for a November/December release) with a substantially thinner edge, new Apple
  
   Fusion Drive
  
  , faster processors (Intel Core
  
   i5
  
  and
  
   i7
  

   Ivy Bridge
  
  ) and graphics along with updates to the ports, but with the same overall depth (stand depth: 8 inches (20.3 cm)). To reduce the edge, the
  
   SuperDrive
  
  was removed on these iMacs.
 
  On October 16, 2014, a new version of the 27-inch (69 cm) iMac was announced, whose main feature is a "
  
   Retina 5K
  
  " display at a resolution of 5120 x 2880 pixels.
  

    [15]
   

  The new model also includes a new
  
   processor
  
  ,
  
   graphics chip
  
  , and
  
   I/O
  
  , along with several new
  
   storage
  
  options. This computer was designed with professional photographers and video editors in mind, with the 5K resolution allowing 4K video to be played at its native resolution in Final Cut Pro, with room for toolbars on the side.
 
  The
  
   original iMac
  
  was the first
  
   legacy-free PC
  
  .
  

    [16]
   

  It was the first Macintosh computer to have a
  
   USB
  
  port but no
  
   floppy disk drive
  
  . Subsequently, all Macs have included USB. Via the USB port, hardware makers could make products compatible with both x86 PCs and Macs. Previously, Macintosh users had to seek out certain hardware, such as keyboards and mice specifically tailored for the "old world" Mac's unique
  
   ADB
  
  interface and printers and modems with
  
   MiniDIN-8
  
  serial ports. Only a limited number of models from certain manufacturers were made with these interfaces, and often came at a premium price. USB, being cross-platform, has allowed Macintosh users to select from a large selection of devices marketed for the
  
   Wintel
  
  PC platform, such as
  
   hubs
  
  ,
  
   scanners
  
  ,
  
   storage devices
  
  ,
  
   USB flash drives
  
  , and
  
   mice
  
  . After iMac, Apple continued to remove older peripheral interfaces and floppy drives from the rest of its product line.
 
  Borrowing from the 1997
  
   Twentieth Anniversary Macintosh
  
  , the various LCD-based iMac designs continued the all-in-one concept first envisioned in Apple's original Macintosh computer. The successful iMac allowed Apple to continue targeting the
  
   Power Macintosh
  
  line at the high-end of the market. This foreshadowed a similar strategy in the notebook market when the iMac-like
  
   MacBook
  
  was released in 2006. Since then, the company has continued this strategy of differentiating the consumer versus professional product lines. Apple's focus on design has allowed each of its subsequent products to create a distinctive identity. Apple avoided using the beige colors then pervading the PC industry. The company would later drift from the multicolored designs of the late 1990s and early 2000s. The latter part of the decade saw Apple using
  
   anodized
  
  aluminum; glass; and white, black, and clear
  
   polycarbonate
  
  plastics among their build materials. Today many PCs are more design-conscious than before iMac's introduction, with multi-shaded design schemes being common, and some desktops and laptops available in colorful, decorative patterns.
  

    [17]
   


  Apple's use of translucent, candy-colored plastics inspired similar
  
   industrial designs
  
  in other consumer products.
  

    [18]
   

  Apple's later introduction of the iPod, iBook G3 (Dual USB), and iMac G4 (all featuring snowy-white plastic), inspired similar designs in other companies' consumer electronics products. The color rollout also featured two distinctive ads: one called 'Life Savers' featured the
  
   Rolling Stones
  
  song "
  
   She's a Rainbow
  
  " and an advertisement for the white version had the introduction of
  
   Cream
  
  's "
  
   White Room
  
  " as its backing track.
 
  iMac has received considerable critical acclaim, including praise from technology columnist
  
   Walt Mossberg
  
  as the "Gold Standard of desktop computing";
  

    [19]
   



    Forbes
   
   magazine
  
  described the original candy-colored line of iMac computers as being an "industry-altering success".
  

    [20]
   

  The first 24"
  
   Core 2 Duo
  
  iMac received
  
   CNET
  
  's "Must-have desktop" in their 2006
  
   Top 10 Holiday Gift Picks
  
  .
  

    [21]
   


  Apple faced a class-action lawsuit filed in 2008 for allegedly deceiving the public by promising millions of colors from the LCD screens of all Mac models while its 20-inch model only held 262,144 colors.
  

    [22]
   

  This issue arose due to the use of 6-bit per pixel
  
   Twisted nematic LCD
  
  screens. The case was dismissed on January 21, 2009.
  

    [23]
   


  While not a criticism of iMac
  
   per se
  
  , the integrated design has some inherent tradeoffs that have garnered criticism. In
  
   The Mythical Midrange Mac Minitower
  
  , Dan Frakes of
  
   Macworld
  
  suggests that with iMac occupying the midrange of Apple's product line, Apple has little to offer consumers who want some ability to expand or upgrade their computers, but don't need (or can't afford) the
  
   Mac Pro
  
  .
  

    [24]
   

  For example, iMac's integration of monitor and computer, while convenient, commits the owner to replacing both at the same time. For a time before the
  
   Mac mini
  
  's introduction, there were rumors of a "headless iMac"
  

    [25]
   

  but the G4 Mac mini as introduced had lower performance compared to iMac, which at the time featured a G5 processor.
  

    [26]
   

  Some 3rd party suppliers such as
  
   Other World Computing
  
  provide upgrade kits that include specialized tools for working on iMacs.
 
  Similarly, though the graphics chipset in some Intel models is on a removable
  
   MXM
  
  , neither Apple nor third parties have offered retail iMac
  
   GPU
  
  upgrades, with the exception of those for the original iMac G3's "mezzanine" PCI slot. Models after iMac G5 (excluding the August 7, 2007 iMac update) made it difficult for the end-user to replace the hard disk or optical drive, and Apple's warranty explicitly forbids upgrading the socketed CPU. While conceding the possibility of a minitower cannibalizing sales from the Mac Pro, Frakes argues there is enough frustration with iMac's limitations to make such a proposition worthwhile. This disparity has become more pronounced after the G4 era since the bottom-end Power Mac G5 (with one brief exception) and Mac Pro models have all been priced in the US$1999–$2499 range, while base model Power Macs G4s and earlier were US$1299–$1799. The current generation iMac has Intel 5th generation i5 and i7 processors, ranging from quad core 2.7 GHz i5 to a quad core 3.4 GHz i7 processor,
  

    [27]
   

  however it is possible to upgrade the 2010 of iMac quite easily.
  

    [28]
   

