

  The
  
   iBook
  
  was a line of
  
   laptop computers
  
  designed and marketed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  from 1999 to 2006. The line targeted entry-level, consumer and education markets, with lower specifications and prices than the
  
   PowerBook
  
  , Apple's higher-end line of laptop computers. It was the first mass consumer product to offer
  
   Wi-Fi
  
  network connectivity, which was then branded by Apple as
  
   AirPort
  
  .
  

    [1]
   



    [2]
   


  The iBook had three different designs during its lifetime. The first, known as the "Clamshell," was inspired by the design of Apple's popular
  
   iMac
  
  line at the time. It was a significant departure from previous portable computer designs due to its shape, bright colors, incorporation of a handle into the casing, lack of a display closing latch, lack of a hinged cover over the external ports and built-in wireless networking. Two years later, the second generation abandoned the original
  
   form factor
  
  in favor of a more conventional, rectangular design. In October 2003, a third iteration was released that added a
  
   PowerPC G4
  
  chip and a slot-loading drive.
 
  Apple replaced the iBook line with the
  
   MacBook
  
  in May 2006 during
  
   Apple's transition to Intel processors
  
  . The MacBook has also evolved into different models, such as the MacBook Pro targeting high performance and the MacBook Air targeting the entry-level, ultra-portable laptop market.
 
  They were also a major name for
  
   education
  
  , with
  
   Henrico County Public Schools
  
  being the first of many school systems in the United States to distribute one to every student.
 


  In the late 1990s, Apple was trimming its product line from the bewildering variety of intersecting
  
   Performa
  
  ,
  
   Quadra
  
  ,
  
   LC
  
  ,
  
   Power Macintosh
  
  and
  
   PowerBook
  
  models to a simplified "four box" strategy: desktop and portable computers, each in both consumer and professional models. Three boxes of this strategy were already in place: The newly introduced
  
   iMac
  
  was the consumer desktop, the
  
   Blue and White G3
  
  filled the professional desktop box, and the
  
   PowerBook
  
  line served as the professional portable line. This left only the consumer portable space empty, leading to much rumor on the Internet of potential designs and features. Putting an end to this speculation, on June 21, 1999,
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  unveiled the iBook G3 during the keynote presentation of
  
   Macworld Conference & Expo
  
  ,
  
   New York City
  
  .
 
  Like the iMac, the iBook G3 had a
  
   PowerPC G3
  

   CPU
  
  , and no legacy Apple interfaces.
  
   USB
  
  ,
  
   Ethernet
  
  ,
  
   modem
  
  ports and an
  
   optical drive
  
  were standard. The ports were left uncovered along the left side, as a cover was thought to be fragile and unnecessary with the iBook's new interfaces, which lacked the exposed pins of earlier connectors. When the lid was closed, the hinge kept it firmly shut, so there was no need for a latch on the screen. The hinge included an integrated carrying handle. Additional power connectors on the bottom surface allowed multiple iBook G3s to be charged on a custom-made rack. The iBook G3 was the first Mac to use Apple's new "Unified Logic Board Architecture," which condensed all of the machine's core features into two chips, and added
  
   AGP
  
  and Ultra DMA support.
 
  The iBook was the first mainstream computer designed and sold with integrated
  
   wireless networking
  
  .
  

    [3]
   

  On the iBook's introduction,
  
   Phil Schiller
  
  , Apple's VP of Marketing, held an iBook while jumping off a height as data from the computer was transferred to another in order to demonstrate the wireless networking capability. The display bezel contained the wireless antenna, which attached to an optional internal wireless card.
  
   Lucent
  
  helped create this wireless capability which established the industry standard. Apple released the
  
   AirPort
  
  Wireless Base Station at the same time.
 
  There was heated debate over many things such as the
  
   aesthetics
  
  , features, weight, performance and pricing.
  

    [4]
   



    [5]
   

  To provide sufficient impact protection, the iBook was larger and heftier than the PowerBook of the time, and yet had lower specifications. Standard features like PC card slots were absent, and so were speculated features such as touch screens and an ultra-long battery life. The iBook gained the label "Barbie's toilet seat," due to the distinctive design.
  

    [6]
   

  Nevertheless, this same design made the iBook G3 unmistakable in movies and television shows.
 
  The iBook was a commercial success.
  

    [7]
   

  The line continually received processor, memory, hard disk upgrades and new colors.
  
   FireWire
  
  and video out were later added. The design was discontinued in May 2001, in favor of the new "Dual USB" iBooks.
 
  The design was clearly influenced by Apple's consumer desktop, the
  
   iMac
  
  . In fact, one of the marketing slogans for the iBook was "iMac to go." The clamshell design also echoed the
  
   eMate 300
  
  . Apple continued its trend of using transparent colored plastics for the shell, and released the iBook clamshell series in several colors, starting with Blueberry and Tangerine, later adding Indigo, Graphite and Key Lime colors. However, unlike the
  
   iMac
  
  , all iBook except for the original Graphite did not use pinstripes. Steve Jobs announced that the Key Lime color, "a little less conservative, a little more fun", was exclusive to the
  
   online Apple Store
  
  . This resulted in some crowd members booing, to which Jobs replied: "Don't you like buying on the Apple Online Store?"
  

    [8]
   


  Compared to follow-up iBook and PowerBook notebook computers, the Clamshell iBook proved to be the more reliable model.
  

    [9]
   

  The original iBook is on exhibition at the London
  
   Design Museum
  
  and the
  
   Yale University Art Gallery
  
  .
  

    [10]
   



    [11]
   

  Vestiges of design ideas first adopted in the iBook G3 can still be seen today: moving interface ports from the back to the sides and leaving them uncovered, omitting a latch for the computer's lid and providing color options and an eye-catching design intended to be seen with the computer open.
 




     (Special Edition)
     



     (SE and regular)
     


       Key Lime exclusive to
       
        Apple Online Store
       



  The original iBook's only customer-serviceable parts were the RAM and AirPort card, accessed via two slots under the keyboard. No other modifications were possible in-warranty. There was no
  
   PCMCIA port
  
  for additional expansion capabilities. 40 screws needed to be removed to access the hard drive. The optical drive, however, can be accessed far more easily, requiring only 11 screws and one standoff to be removed. Later on, some users transplanted a 1024×768 LCD from the more recent white iBook into a clamshell iBook. This is only possible with the "FireWire" and "FireWire SE" models, as they have 8 MB of video RAM; the older ones only have 4 MB.
  

    [13]
   


  All clamshell iBooks shipped with Mac OS 8.6 or 9.0. All clamshell iBooks supported
  
   Mac OS X 10.0
  
  through
  
   10.3.9
  
  .
  
   Mac OS X v10.4
  
  "Tiger", which requires a FireWire port, can also be installed, though only on the late-model iBook G3 FireWire/SE (366/466 MHz). It is possible to use third-party software such as
  
   XPostFacto
  
  to install version 10.4 on earlier clamshell iBooks.
 
  Apple debuted the next-generation iBook G3 at a press conference in
  
   Cupertino, California
  
  , on May 1, 2001. The previous bold colors and bulky form-factor were abandoned, as were the handle, latch-less design and additional power connectors on the bottom surface.
 
  The resulting iBook was available in white only, hence the name "Snow" and incorporated transparent
  
   polycarbonate
  
  in its casing. It was 30% lighter, and occupied less than half of the volume of the model it replaced, being smaller in all three dimensions. Despite that, it added an extra USB port and a higher resolution screen. Apple claimed the compact design did not sacrifice durability, saying it was "twice as durable" as the previous model.
 
  With this revision, Apple began transitioning to translucent and white
  
   polycarbonate
  
  casings in most of its consumer line, such as the
  
   iMac
  
  and the
  
   eMac
  
  . In contrast, most of its professional products used an
  
   anodized
  

   aluminum
  
  finish. Near the end of its run, the Snow iBook G3 case became opaque and white instead of translucent white and magnesium.
 
  Apple added a
  
   PowerPC G4
  
  chip to the iBook line on October 23, 2003, finally ending Apple’s use of the PowerPC G3 chip. A slot-loading optical drive replaced the disc tray. The iBook G4 also features an opaque white case finish and keyboard and a plastic display hinge.
 
  The iBook keyboard lifts up, allowing installation of the AirPort (wireless) card and additional memory. This gives the keyboard a "spongy" effect, especially in PowerPC G3 models with the translucent keyboard. The "sponginess" was corrected in the PowerPC G4 models.
 
  Accessing the hard disk drive is complex and time-consuming, involving partial disassembly of the unit and the removal of over 20 different-sized screws.
 
  The memory in the iBook G4 is covered by a removable Airport card, and accessible by removing the RAM shield with a
  
   Phillips #00 screwdriver
  
  . While some of the earlier models (e.g., 800 MHz and 933 MHz) have a specified 640 MB RAM limit, it is possible to have a total of 1.12 GB of RAM installed (128 MB built-in, plus a 1 GB SO-DIMM), or 1.25 or 1.5 GB in the later models with 256 or 512 MB of RAM soldered to the logic board.
 
  Although no longer officially supported by macOS versions beyond those given in the chart above, the system has also been supported via
  
   MorphOS
  
  (an Amiga compatible OS) since version 3.2.
 
  Apple initiated the "iBook Logic Board Repair Extension Program" in January 2004, which covered the expense of repairing display problems of iBook G3 models for three years.
  

    [14]
   

  In June 2004, the Repair Extension Program was expanded to cover "all White G3 iBooks."
  

    [15]
   



    [16]
   


  The iBook G4 allegedly suffered from display problems similar to those of the iBook G3, but was not covered by the repair extension program. Owners of iBooks that required expensive repairs for these problems submitted new class action lawsuits in December 2006.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  On May 2, 2007, the Danish Consumer Board published an extensive 3rd party report
  

    [17]
   



    [18]
   

  concerning the Apple iBook G4 logic board issue. A press release
  

    [19]
   

  referred to the global consequences this could have for possible guarantee claims.
 