


   iLife
  
  is a
  
   software suite
  
  for
  
   macOS
  
  and
  
   iOS
  
  developed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  It consists of various programs for media creation, organization, editing and publishing. It was composed of:
  
   iTunes
  
  ,
  
   iMovie
  
  ,
  
   iPhoto
  
  ,
  
   iDVD
  
  ,
  
   iWeb
  
  and
  
   GarageBand
  
  . With the exception of iTunes (which was separated from iLife at an earlier point) only iMovie and GarageBand remain and are sold separately on Apple's
  
   Mac App Store
  
  .
  

    [2]
   

  iDVD and iWeb have been discontinued and iPhoto has been succeeded by
  
   Photos
  
  .
 
  iLife is preinstalled on new
  
   Mac
  
  computers and was sold as a bundle on DVD. With the introduction of the Mac App Store, Apple sold the programs separately and eventually discontinued the DVD altogether. iMovie and GarageBand remain free with the purchase of any new Mac computer or iOS device. Upgrades to the new versions from past App Store versions are currently a free upgrade for any user in comparison to past versions pre-App Store where the entire suite has to be purchased.
 



   iMovie
  
  is the oldest of the application included with iLife. It was marketed by Apple as an easy-to-use video editing application that allowed novice users to quickly create professional-quality movies. The first version of the software was released in October 1999 and bundled with the
  
   iMac DV
  
  . On April 28, 2000, Apple began allowing users to download iMovie free of charge from its website.
  

    [3]
   

  iMovie remained free until 2003, when it became part of the first iLife release, which was sold for $49. Apple continued to update and develop the existing iMovie software until the release of iLife '08 in 2007, when a new version, iMovie '08, was released. iMovie '08 was completely rewritten as a new application and introduced significant changes to the
  
   user interface
  
  .
  

    [4]
   



   iPhoto
  
  was the second application in iLife that began as a free application available for download from Apple's website. The first version was announced at the
  
   Macworld Conference & Expo
  
  in 2002. It was billed as being the "missing link" in photography. In addition to allowing users to import, organize, and perform basic edits on their photos, iPhoto also let users print photos in a variety of ways, including as a bound book.
  

    [5]
   

  Subsequent versions of iPhoto have added a number of features, including automatic organization by events,
  

    [4]
   

  faces (using
  
   facial recognition
  
  technology), and places.
  

    [6]
   

  iPhoto also includes a full-screen editing mode and a feature called "Photocasting" (a way to share photos with others directly from within iPhoto).
  

    [7]
   



   iDVD
  
  was first announced on January 9, 2001. It was bundled with the
  
   Power Mac G4
  
  , the first Mac model with a
  
   SuperDrive
  
  that could read and write both
  
   CDs
  
  and
  
   DVDs
  
  . The first version of iDVD introduced a simple way to design customized DVDs with menus, backdrops, slideshows and home movies that could be played back on most
  
   DVD players
  
  .
  

    [8]
   

  iDVD was never released as a download. Instead, it was bundled with the first version of iLife, released in 2003.
 
  The remaining two applications in the iLife suite were first introduced as part of iLife '04 and iLife '06, respectively. Released in 2004, the first version of
  
   GarageBand
  
  was designed as an easy way for both beginner and advanced musicians to create and edit music on their computers.
  
   iWeb
  
  was introduced at the Macworld Conference & Expo on January 10, 2006 and was promoted as a way for Mac users to create their own professionally designed websites without having to know or write
  
   HTML
  
  or any other code. The last version of iWeb was released with iLife '11
  

    [7]
   


     $15 per iLife app, $20 per iWork app
     

       [11]
      



   Notes about specific releases:
  

  iMovie is a
  
   digital video
  
  editor. The process of film capture by a
  
   digital camera
  
  via
  
   FireWire
  
  is automated, with iMovie allowing users to split up their videos, add titles and
  
   special effects
  
  , and reorganize them into movies. It is also compatible with
  
   MPEG 4
  
  cameras,
  
   AVCHD
  
  camcorders,
  
   HDV
  
  cameras, and Apple's
  
   iSight
  
  webcams. Photographs may also be used, and a soundtrack may be added using tracks from the user's
  
   iTunes
  
  music library. These can then be exported into a variety of viewable formats, including the
  
   .mov
  
  format used by Apple's
  
   QuickTime Player
  
  .
  

    [12]
   


  GarageBand is a music and podcast creation application that includes over 1,000 pre-recorded audio loops for use in projects. The program also supports
  
   software instruments
  
  and importation from real instruments, such as guitars and keyboards.
 
  iPhoto was an application that allowed users to store, view, edit, and share their digital photos. Users could organize their photos in a number of ways. Events automatically grouped photos taken around the same time. Faces uses
  
   facial recognition
  
  to identify photos containing faces, which can then be tagged by users and sorted according to who is in the photo. Places takes advantage of
  
   geotagging
  
  technology. Many cameras today embed
  
   metadata
  
  into their digital photos containing information about the location where the photo was taken. Places allowed users to browse and see their photos on a map. iPhoto included tools to crop photos, reduce
  
   red-eye
  
  , add effects such as
  
   sepia
  
  and
  
   black and white
  
  , and to adjust the
  
   exposure
  
  ,
  
   saturation
  
  ,
  
   contrast
  
  and black and white balance of photos. In addition, users could have their photos printed, create books (hard bound copies of which can be ordered), calendars and greetings cards. As of April 8, 2015, Apple discontinued and removed iPhoto from the Mac App Store with the release of the new
  
   Photos
  
  app bundled with OS X Yosemite 10.10.3. As of today, iPhoto was NOT able to sync with iCloud and Photos can.
 
  iDVD integrated with
  
   iMovie
  
  to allow the burning of movies onto a
  
   DVD
  
  . iDVD allows the user to customize their DVD with custom menus based on themes (many of which make use of the content of the movies) and custom chapter points. It contains the
  
   MPEG-2
  
  encoder functionality needed to produce DVD-compatible content. Each new version added more menu themes. In iLife '09 and iLife '11, iDVD was not updated (with the exception of a few bug fixes). There is no support for
  
   Blu-ray
  
  disc burning in the current version of iDVD.
  

    [13]
   

  As of July 20, 2011, Apple discontinued iDVD and it is no longer included with new Apple computers nor for sale.
 
  iWeb, released at the
  
   Macworld Conference & Expo
  
  on January 10, 2006, provided the ability to easily turn content from the other iLife applications into
  
   websites
  
  using Apple-designed templates with one-click uploading to Apple's
  
   MobileMe
  
  sharing service. iWeb also allowed users to create links to their own podcasts and photocasts from the webpage. iWeb was the latest addition to the iLife suite when it was discontinued in June 2011.
  

    [14]
   

  As of July 20, 2011, Apple discontinued iWeb and it is no longer included with new Apple computers nor for sale.
 
  MobileMe Web Gallery was a feature designed for easy photo sharing from directly within the iLife suite. It allowed users to create events or photo albums using the Web Gallery feature of their MobileMe account, and permitted visitors to a user's Gallery to view the photos. As of July 1, 2012 MobileMe and its Gallery was discontinued.
 