


   iDVD
  
  is a discontinued
  

    [1]
   


   DVD
  
  -creation
  
   application
  
  for
  
   Mac OS X
  
  produced by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  iDVD allows the user to burn
  
   QuickTime
  
  movies,
  
   MP3
  
  music, and digital
  
   photos
  
  to a DVD that can then played on a commercial DVD player. It is comparable to
  
   Windows DVD Maker
  
  ,
  

    [2]
   

  and was often considered the last step of
  
   Apple's
  

   iLife
  
  suite, bringing together the results of all of the other iLife apps onto a
  
   removable medium
  
  .
 


  While initially available only for
  
   Macs
  
  with a
  
   SuperDrive
  
  , it was included until 2011 with all new Macs; from iDVD 6 onwards,
  
   Apple
  
  supported the ability to burn projects with third-party optical drives. iDVD was no longer preinstalled on Macs shipping with
  
   Mac OS X 10.7 Lion
  
  , and was not available on the Mac App Store with all of the other iLife apps. It was, however, still available in the boxed copy of iLife '11, until the release of iLife '13.
  

    [3]
   


  iDVD included over 100 Apple-designed themes for DVD menus and submenus, which allowed for the easy creation of DVD menu systems. Each theme included "drop zones," onto which movies or photographs could be placed, some of which could be animated automatically. Any theme could be applied to each of the menus in an iDVD project.
  

    [4]
   


  iDVD integrated tightly with the rest of the
  
   iLife
  
  suite, as well as with
  
   Final Cut Express
  
  and
  
   Final Cut Pro
  
  .
  
   iMovie
  
  projects and
  
   iPhoto
  
  slideshows could be exported directly to iDVD. In the case of iMovie projects, scene selection menus were automatically created in accordance with chapter markers that were set within iMovie. The application also had a Media panel that provided access to the user's
  
   iTunes
  
  library, iPhoto library and Movies folder at any time. It also provided a map view, which showed a flow chart of the project's menu system.
  

    [5]
   

  Another feature was the ability to hide or show an approximation of the 'TV-safe area' (as old televisions often cut off some of a video's outer areas). iDVD also incorporated a 'One-Step DVD' function, which would automatically rewind the currently connected
  
   DV
  

   camcorder
  
  and burn a DVD of the video footage stored on the tape.
 
  iDVD shipped with fonts (located at /Applications/iDVD.app/Contents/Resources/Fonts) that were not installed, to prevent them from being available to other applications by default.
 
     Incompatible with later versions of Mac OS X 10.5
    
     First Universal binary version. Refined look based on iTunes 5 and 6.
    