


   iWeb
  
  was a template-based
  
   WYSIWYG
  

   website
  
  creation tool developed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  The first version of iWeb was announced at the
  
   Macworld Conference & Expo
  
  on January 10, 2006 as part of the
  
   iLife '06
  
  suite of digital lifestyle applications.
  

    [1]
   

  iWeb '11 was released on October 20, 2010 as part of the
  
   iLife
  
  '11 suite, though it was not updated from the previous release (version 3.0.2).
  

    [2]
   

  iWeb allowed users to create
  
   websites
  
  and
  
   blogs
  
  and customize them with their own text, photos and movies. Users could then publish their websites to
  
   MobileMe
  
  or another hosting service. In addition to its ability to publish to MobileMe, iWeb integrated with other services, including
  
   Facebook
  
  ,
  
   YouTube
  
  ,
  
   AdSense
  
  and
  
   Google Maps
  
  .
  

    [2]
   

  Apple ceased development in 2011.
 


  iWeb allowed users to create and design websites and blogs without coding, and included a number of Apple-designed themes, each of which had several page templates with coordinated fonts and colors. Users could customize these pages by replacing placeholder text and by dragging and dropping their own photos and movies into the document. Templates included blog, podcast, and photo and movie gallery pages, as well as standard "Welcome" and "About Me" pages.
 
  iWeb integrated with other applications in the iLife suite. The iLife Media Browser is a list of all the music, movies, and photos stored in
  
   iTunes
  
  ,
  
   iMovie
  
  , and
  
   iPhoto
  
  . Content could be dragged from the Media Browser window and placed in the open page. Local files could also be dropped directly into the page.
 
  Nine interactive "widgets" were included with iWeb. Among other things, these widgets let users embed YouTube videos and Google Maps, include a countdown timer and add
  
   RSS
  
  feeds.
 
  iWeb featured built-in support for publishing to
  
   MobileMe
  
  , a suite of online applications developed by Apple, and to other third-party web hosts with FTP. Once account information was entered, users simply clicked a button to publish their entire website. iWeb could then publish updates to the user's
  
   Facebook
  
  profile to notify others of changes to the website.
 
  iWeb was in its third version at the time of discontinuation, and had a limited feature set and some unresolved bugs. Some limitations included:
 
  In June 2011, rumors emerged that iWeb would not be developed further.
  

    [3]
   

  On June 30, 2012 Apple finally pulled the plug on MobileMe. All iWeb websites hosted on MobileMe disappeared if not hosted elsewhere. Apple provided instructions of how to move iWeb sites to another host.
 