


   iMovie
  
  is a
  
   video editing software
  
  application sold by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  for the
  
   Mac
  
  and
  
   iOS
  
  (
  
   iPhone
  
  ,
  
   iPad
  
  ,
  
   iPad Mini
  
  and
  
   iPod Touch
  
  ). It was originally released in 1999 as a
  
   Mac OS 8
  
  application bundled with the first FireWire-enabled consumer Mac model – the
  
   iMac DV
  
  .
  

    [1]
   

  Since version 3, iMovie has been an
  
   OS X
  
  -only application included with the
  
   iLife
  
  suite of Mac applications.
  

    [2]
   

  From 2003, iMovie is included free with all new Mac computers.
 
  iMovie imports video footage to the Mac using either the
  
   FireWire
  
  interface on most MiniDV format digital video cameras or the computer's
  
   USB
  
  port. It can also import video and photo files from a hard drive. From there, the user can edit the photos and video clips and add titles, themes, music, and effects, including basic color correction and video enhancement tools and transitions such as fades and slides.
 


  Starting with version 5 (from 2005), iMovie processes high-definition video from
  
   HDV
  

   camcorders
  
  , in later versions also from
  
   AVCHD
  
  camcorders and
  
   H.264
  
  -compressed video from
  
   MPEG-4
  
  or
  
   QuickTime Movie files (.mov).
  
  , e.g. as generated by a number of
  
   digital photo cameras
  
  with HD video recording feature. To facilitate this, iMovie/iLife installs the
  
   Apple Intermediate Codec
  
  on the system as a
  
   QuickTime
  
  component. iMovie
  
   transcodes
  
  (‘optimizes’) HD video upon ingestion (‘import’) using this
  
   codec
  
  and stores it in the QuickTime file format (.movie).
 
     • Larger project thumbnails that match the look of iMovie for iOS
    
     • Fast project creation lets you begin editing with a single click
    
     Delete render files to recover drive space.
     

       [3]
      


  iMovie HD included support for
  
   HDV
  
  (720p and 1080i) and integration with the rest of the
  
   iLife
  
  suite, with toolbox buttons allowing the importing of images from
  
   iPhoto
  
  , music from
  
   iTunes
  
  and the setting of chapter markers ready for exporting to
  
   iDVD
  
  .
 
  iMovie HD 5 imported mjpeg files as dv by default, which introduces noise; mjpeg files are cryptically lumped with "isight" files in this version.
 
  Another new feature was included called "Magic iMovie", which attempted to automate the whole process of video editing, by allowing a common transition to be added between scenes, a music track to be synchronised with the video and a
  
   DVD
  
  to be created with the accompanying iDVD software.
 
  iMovie 6 was released in January 2006 as part of the
  
   iLife
  
  '06 suite, and was also originally optionally included with iLife '08 as a substitution for iMovie '08 (due to the new version's incompatibility with older Power PC Macintosh computers). However, this option was removed after iLife '09 was released. It was integrated with
  
   iPhoto
  
  ,
  
   iTunes
  
  ,
  
   iDVD
  
  ,
  
   GarageBand
  
  and
  
   iWeb
  
  . iMovie HD 6 was designed for ease of use, and included new themes. Themes allow the user to drop movie clips or photos into professionally designed backdrops. Each theme included full-motion graphic bumpers and transitions. iMovie HD 6 also added real-time effects, which took advantage of the computer's graphic processing unit to perform some effects without rendering. It also introduced real-time titling, enhanced audio tools and effects, the ability to have multiple projects open at once, video podcasts and blogs (using integration with iWeb), and a refined look based on iTunes 5 and 6.
 
  iMovie '08 (Version 7.0) was released in August 2007 as a part of the iLife '08 suite. iMovie '08 was a complete redesign and rewrite of iMovie. It had much better HD output, and more formats to convert to. This was limited, however, by an undocumented restriction on supported codecs.
  
   iPhoto
  
  uses the QuickTime library and can create thumbnails for all
  
   QuickTime
  
  supported formats, but most of these cannot be used by iMovie '08. Some of the formats that iMovie '08 is able to import will not be recognized when they are added to an iPhoto library. Though
  
   Motion JPEG
  
  -encoded AVI files do appear to be recognized, this was the most common format used by digital cameras. The tile-based editing interface was also promoted as something unique and groundbreaking, even though it is functionally identical to the interface of the Toaster Flyer non-linear digital video editing systems released for Amiga computers by NewTek, Inc. in 1993. A new feature called "skimming" for quickly previewing video in the library at a user controlled speed was added, and so was a feature that allows the user to highlight parts of video clips just like highlighting text. iMovie 08 also had the ability to add more than two layers of background sound, including multiple music, narration and sound effects; previous versions could play multiple tracks but could display only two extra audio tracks. It included more exportation formats, including iPhone-sized video. It also supported non-tape-based HD video, such as
  
   AVCHD
  
  and footage from DVD and HDD camcorders. iMovie '08 also has the ability to export movies to the
  
   YouTube
  
  video sharing website.
 
  According to Apple's
  
   system requirements
  
  , iMovie '08 requires a Mac with either a 1.9 GHz or faster PowerPC G5 or Intel processor. G4s are not supported, even though Apple sold its last G4-based Computers (iBook G4s) 14 months before the release of iLife '08. However, a system hack enables iMovie 7.1 or higher to run on a PowerPC G4.
  

    [5]
   


  iMovie 08 was criticized due to its drastic abandonment of some iMovie HD 6 features. Former
  
   New York Times
  
  reviewer
  
   David Pogue
  
  said "iMovie ‘08 is an utter bafflement... incapable of the more sophisticated editing that the old iMovie made so enjoyable...All visual effects are gone — even basic options like slow motion, reverse motion, fast motion, and black-and-white. And you can’t have more than one project open at a time."
  

    [6]
   


  Features removed included the classic timeline, the ability to create DVD chapter markers, support for plugins, and in-timeline audio adjustment and control. iMovie '08 imports to a much more limited set of video codecs and metadata formats than previous versions of iMovie or today's QuickTime Player. For example, QuickTime Player can be extended to support the FLIP Video 3ivx MPEG-4 codec, but iMovie '08 cannot. iMovie '08 also removed the ability to import DV footage. As a result, all resulting videos have
  
   lossy compression
  
  applied and there is no facility for managing full format video. The peculiar lack of QuickTime support means
  
   QuickTime Pro
  
  can edit a larger range of video than iMovie '08.
 
  Apple released iMovie HD 6 as a free download to those who had purchased iMovie '08.
  

    [7]
   

  However, in response to the release of the subsequent newer version of iMovie '09, Apple removed the download in late January 2009
  

    [8]
   

  while also reducing the $299 price tag for
  
   Final Cut Express
  
  to $199. Several of the features removed from iMovie '08 that were previously included with iMovie HD 6 have been restored into iMovie '09 and, more recently, iMovie '11.
 
  iMovie '09 (Version 8.0) was released January 2009 as part of the iLife '09 package. It introduced some new features and restored some features from previous versions of iMovie, including basic video effects (such as fast/slow motion and aged film) and image stabilization as well as travel map functions for marking locations where a video was shot. iMovie '09 also introduced simple implementations of more advanced features such as
  
   picture-in-picture
  
  and
  
   Chroma keying
  
  . It also improved editing with a precision cut editor and a clip trimmer, improved support for hard drive-based cameras such as the Flip Mino, added some new titles and transitions, and added full iDVD support (which was unavailable in iMovie '08). In addition, it introduced a Full-Screen Library Browser with which the user can find and examine all of his or her video in one place.
 
  iMovie '11 (Version 9.0) was released on October 20, 2010 as part of the iLife '11 package. It has the ability to make trailers for home movies, more control over audio, instant replay and flash and hold effects, facial recognition, news themes, and the ability to watch the video on a Mac, iPad, iPhone/iPod touch, or Apple TV, as well as sharing on Facebook and YouTube. It now supports the
  
   AVCHD Lite
  
  format.
 
  Apple worked with
  
   Abbey Road Studios
  
  in London, England to bring original music/film scores to iMovie '11. The music is most notably used in the "trailers" feature provided by the software.
 
  On January 6, 2011, Apple made iMovie '11 (along with
  
   Aperture
  
  , the
  
   iWork
  
  suite, and the rest of the iLife suite) available on the then-new
  
   Mac App Store
  
  .
  

    [9]
   


  iMovie 10.0 was released on October 22, 2013 by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  This version of iMovie was a complete redesign with more options to share a movie, more movie and trailer theme options from iMovie for iOS, easier to make picture-in-pictures, cutaways, side-by-sides etc., more realistic green-screen effects and easier refinements.
  

    [10]
   


  iMovie 10.1 was released on October 13, 2015. It allowed for 4K video editing and included a major user interface overhaul, as well as the removal of some peripheral features.
 
  On June 7, 2010,
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  announced in his
  
   WWDC
  
  keynote that the upcoming
  
   iPhone 4
  
  would support a new,
  
   iOS
  
  -native version of iMovie that supports many of the basic features of the Mac version of the software.
  

    [11]
   

  The app may be obtained by downloading it from the
  
   App Store
  
  for $4.99. iMovie for iPhone was officially available on June 24, 2010 to coincide with the launch of the
  
   iPhone 4
  
  .
 
  On September 1, 2010, iMovie was made compatible with the new 4th-generation
  
   iPod Touch
  
  . An iPad version of iMovie for iOS was made available with the release of
  
   iPad 2
  
  , announced at an Apple media event on March 2, 2011 and released seven days later.
  

    [12]
   

  On March 7, 2012,
  
   Tim Cook
  
  announced an updated version of iMovie for iOS along with the
  
   third-generation iPad
  
  .
 