


   Lightning
  
  is a proprietary
  
   computer bus
  
  and power connector created by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  Introduced on September 12, 2012
  
   (
   
    2012-09-12
   
   )
  
  , to replace its predecessor, the
  
   30-pin dock connector
  
  , the Lightning connector is used to connect Apple mobile devices like
  
   iPhones
  
  ,
  
   iPads
  
  , and
  
   iPods
  
  to host computers, external monitors, cameras, USB battery chargers, and other peripherals. Using 8 pins instead of 30, Lightning is significantly more compact than the 30-pin dock connector and can be inserted with either side facing up. However, unless used with an adapter, it is incompatible with cables and peripherals designed for its predecessor.
 


  The Lightning connector was introduced on September 12, 2012
  
   (
   
    2012-09-12
   
   )
  
  , as a replacement for the 30-pin dock connector, to be used for all new hardware that was announced at the same event.
  

    [1]
   

  The first compatible devices were the
  
   iPhone 5
  
  , the
  
   iPod Touch (5th generation)
  
  , and the
  
   iPod Nano
  
  (7th generation).
  

    [2]
   

  The
  
   iPad (4th generation)
  
  and the
  
   iPad Mini (1st generation)
  
  were added as Lightning devices in October 2012.
  

    [3]
   



    [4]
   


  On November 25, 2012, Apple acquired the "Lightning" trademark in Europe from
  
   Harley-Davidson
  
  . Apple was given a
  
   partial transfer
  
  of the Lightning trademark, suggesting that Harley-Davidson likely retained the rights to use the name for motorcycle-related products.
  

    [5]
   



    [6]
   

  Apple is the sole proprietor of the trademark and copyrights for the designs and specifications of the lightning cable.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  The
  
   iPad Pro
  
  , released in 2015, features the first Lightning connector supporting
  
   USB 3.0
  
  .
  

    [7]
   

  However, the included cable only supports USB 2.0 as it lacks the necessary extra pins, so any USB 3.0-supporting Lightning devices would be bought separately.
  

    [7]
   


  Lightning is an 8-pin connector which carries a digital signal. Unlike the Apple 30 pin connector it replaces (and USB Type A or B connectors), the Lightning connector can be inserted either face up or face down. Apple offers various adapters which allow the Lightning connector to be used with other interfaces, such as 30-pin,
  
   USB
  
  ,
  
   HDMI
  
  ,
  
   VGA
  
  , and
  
   SD cards
  
  . The Lightning to 30-pin adapter supports only a limited subset of the available 30-pin signals: USB data, USB charging, and analog audio output (via the
  
   DAC
  
  inside of the adapter
  

    [8]
   

  ).
 
  Official Lightning connectors contain an authentication chip that was intended to make it difficult for third-party manufacturers to produce compatible accessories without being approved by Apple;
  

    [9]
   

  however, the chip has been cracked.
  

    [10]
   


  The pin out is detailed in the info box. However, each pin on the reverse side of the connector is connected to its directly opposite twin on the other side. Part of the processor's job is to route the power and data signals correctly whichever way up the connector is inserted.
  

    [10]
   


  The plug measures 6.7mm by 1.5mm.
 
  Apple has not publicly discussed
  
   micro-USB
  
  , but various tech news websites state that Lightning might have been used instead of Micro-USB because of its compatibility with docks and speaker systems;
  

    [11]
   

  the ability to insert the cable in either direction for user convenience;
  

    [12]
   

  Apple wishing to maintain control over the ethics of the supply chain of accessories
  

    [13]
   

  and the ability to charge a licensing fee; the structural weakness of USB connectors;
  

    [12]
   

  and the ability to either charge a device, or allow a device to power accessories. The optional supplemental standard
  
   USB On-The-Go
  
  allows USB devices to do this.
  

    [14]
   


  On April 10, 2015, Apple announced a new line of
  
   MacBooks
  
  that featured
  
   USB Type-C
  
  , which has similarities with Lightning, and advantages over Micro-USB. USB Type-C, like Lightning, but unlike its predecessor micro-USB, can be plugged in any direction. USB Type-C and Lightning are not interchangeable; and until the launch of the new MacBooks required adapters to work with each other.
 
  The following Apple-made devices use Lightning connectors as of September 2016
  

    [update]
   

  :
 