


       Bluetooth 4.0
      

  The
  
   iPad Mini 3
  
  (stylized and marketed as
  
   iPad mini 3
  
  also known as
  
   iPad mini 3 with Touch ID
  
  ) is the third-generation
  
   iPad Mini
  

   tablet computer
  
  designed, developed and marketed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  It was announced alongside the
  
   iPad Air 2
  
  on October 16, 2014 and then released on October 22.
  

    [2]
   

  It uses primarily the same design and hardware as that of its predecessor, the
  
   iPad Mini 2
  
  . Its new features are the addition of the
  
   Touch ID
  
  sensor compatible with
  
   Apple Pay
  
  ,
  

    [2]
   

  differing storage sizes and being available in gold color, as well as the previous colors.
 
  On September 9, 2015, the iPad Mini 3 was discontinued and was replaced by the
  
   iPad Mini 4
  
  .
 


  The iPad mini 3 comes with the iOS 8.1 operating system preinstalled. It comes with several built-in applications, which are Camera, Photos, Messages,
  
   FaceTime
  
  , Mail, Music,
  
   Safari
  
  , Maps,
  
   Siri
  
  , Calendar,
  
   iTunes Store
  
  ,
  
   App Store
  
  , Notes, Contacts,
  
   iBooks
  
  ,
  
   Game Center
  
  ,
  
   Reminders
  
  , Clock, Videos,
  
   Newsstand
  
  ,
  
   Photo Booth
  
  and Podcasts. The
  
   Apple App Store
  
  , a digital
  
   application
  

   distribution
  
  platform for iOS, allows users to browse and download
  
   applications
  
  made by various developers from the
  
   iTunes Store
  
  . Additional apps made by Apple itself are available for free download, which are
  
   iMovie
  
  ,
  
   GarageBand
  
  ,
  
   iTunes U
  
  ,
  
   Find My iPhone
  
  ,
  
   Find My Friends
  
  , Apple Store, Trailers, Remote, and the
  
   iWork
  
  apps (
  
   Pages
  
  ,
  
   Keynote
  
  , and
  
   Numbers
  
  ).
  

    [3]
   

  Like all
  
   iOS
  
  devices, the iPad Mini 3 can also sync content and other data with a Mac or PC using iTunes. Although the tablet is not designed to make phone calls over a cellular network, users can use a headset or the built-in speaker and microphone to place phone calls over Wi-Fi or cellular using a
  
   VoIP
  
  application such as
  
   Skype
  
  (if hardware supported).
 
  The iPad Mini 3 includes a version of
  
   Apple Pay
  
  with the in-store
  
   NFC
  
  functionality removed.
 
  Siri, an
  
   intelligent personal assistant
  
  and
  
   knowledge navigator
  
  , is integrated into the device and it can be activated hands-free. The application uses a
  
   natural language user interface
  
  to answer questions, make recommendations, and perform actions by delegating requests to a set of
  
   Web services
  
  . Apple claims that the software adapts to the user's individual preferences over time and personalizes results.
  

    [4]
   

  Additionally, Siri can identify songs by using
  
   Shazam
  
  to listen to any song playing nearby. Siri then stores a list of any songs it has managed to identify on iTunes.
 

   Facebook
  
  and
  
   Twitter
  
  come integrated through Apple's native apps. Facebook features can be directly accessed from within native apps such as Calendar which can sync Facebook events, or use Facebook's
  
   like button
  
  from within the
  
   Apple App Store
  
  .
  

    [5]
   



    [6]
   


  The iPad Mini 3 uses almost exactly the same design as that of the iPad Mini 2, with the addition of Touch ID. Additionally, with the announcement of iPad Mini 3 and the iPad Air 2, Apple added the gold color option to the existing silver and space gray color choices of iPads.
 
  iPad Mini 3 uses nearly the same hardware as the iPad Mini 2, the main exception being the addition of the Touch ID sensor. It has a 7.9"
  
   retina display
  
  with 2048-by-1536-pixel resolution at 326 ppi. The iPad Mini 3 also uses the A7 chip with 64-bit architecture and the M7 motion coprocessor. It has a 5MP iSight Camera capable of recording 1080p HD video and a 1.2MP FaceTime HD Camera capable of recording 720p HD video.
 
  The new Touch ID sensor detects the user's fingerprint and can be used instead of a passcode to unlock the iPad. Touch ID on the iPad Mini 3 is also compatible with Apple Pay and can be used to authorize purchases in online apps only with fingerprint verification, as opposed to entering passwords.
  

    [7]
   


  The iPad Mini 3 is available with storage options of 16, 64 or 128GB and has no expansion option. Apple has released a "camera connection kit" with an
  
   SD card
  
  reader, but it can only be used to transfer photos and videos to an iPad.
  

    [8]
   


  The iPad Mini 3 received positive reviews but drew fainter praise than its predecessor, as it was identical to the iPad Mini 2 except for the addition of Touch ID and the availability of the gold color. The iPad Mini 2 was regarded as a better buy, being $100 USD cheaper and featuring the same screen and internals. While the Mini 2 and 3 were stuck at the same hardware level of the original iPad Air, the
  
   iPad Air 2
  
  's new hardware was considerably more powerful. Furthermore, the Air 2 was also redesigned lighter and smaller than the original Air, which nullified some of the advantages of the Mini 2 and 3's compact form factor.
  

    [9]
   


  ≠
 