


       Bluetooth 4.0
      

  The
  
   iPad Air
  
  is the first-generation
  
   iPad
  
  Air, or theoretically the fifth-generation iPad
  
   tablet computer
  
  designed, developed and marketed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  It was announced on October 22, 2013, and was released on November 1, 2013.
  

    [1]
   

  The iPad Air features a thinner design with similarities to the contemporary
  
   iPad Mini 2
  
  , along with the same
  
   64-bit
  

   Apple A7
  
  processor with M7 coprocessor. It was then discontinued with the launch of a 9.7 inch
  
   iPad Pro
  
  on March 21, 2016.
 
  Its successor, the
  
   iPad Air 2
  
  , was announced on October 16, 2014.
 


  The iPad Air was announced during a keynote at the
  
   Yerba Buena Center for the Arts
  
  on October 22, 2013.
  

    [5]
   

  The theme of the keynote was named 'We still have a lot to cover'.
  

    [6]
   


  The iPad Air comes with the iOS 7 operating system, released on September 18, 2013.
  

    [7]
   


   Jonathan Ive
  
  , the designer of iOS 7's new elements, described the update as "bringing order to complexity", highlighting features such as refined typography, new icons, translucency, layering, physics, and gyroscope-driven
  
   parallaxing
  
  as some of the major changes to the design.
  

    [8]
   

  The design of both iOS 7 and
  
   OS X Mavericks
  
  (version 10.9) noticeably depart from
  
   skeuomorphic
  
  elements such as green felt in
  
   Game Center
  
  , wood in
  
   Newsstand
  
  , and leather in
  
   Calendar
  
  , in favor of flat, colourful design.
  

    [8]
   


  It can act as a
  
   hotspot
  
  with some carriers, sharing its Internet connection over Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, or USB, and also access the
  
   Apple App Store
  
  , a digital
  
   application
  

   distribution
  
  platform for iOS. The service allows users to browse and download
  
   applications
  
  from the
  
   iTunes Store
  
  that were developed with
  
   Xcode
  
  and the
  
   iOS SDK
  
  and were published through Apple. From the App Store,
  
   GarageBand
  
  ,
  
   iMovie
  
  ,
  
   iPhoto
  
  , and the
  
   iWork
  
  apps (
  
   Pages
  
  ,
  
   Keynote
  
  , and
  
   Numbers
  
  ) are available.
  

    [9]
   


  The iPad Air comes with several applications, including
  
   Siri
  
  ,
  
   Safari
  
  , Mail, Photos, Video, Music, iTunes, App Store, Maps, Notes, Calendar,
  
   Game Center
  
  , Photo Booth, and Contacts.
  

    [10]
   

  Like all
  
   iOS
  
  devices, the iPad can sync content and other data with a Mac or PC using iTunes, although iOS 5 and later can be managed and backed up without a computer. Although the tablet is not designed to make phone calls over a cellular network, users can use a headset or the built-in speakers and microphone to place phone calls over Wi-Fi or cellular using a
  
   VoIP
  
  application, such as
  
   Skype
  
  .
  

    [11]
   

  The device has a
  
   dictation
  
  application, using the same voice recognition technology as the
  
   iPhone 4S
  
  . This enables users to speak and the iPad types what they say on the screen, though the iPad must have an internet connection (via Wi-Fi or cellular network) because the speech is processed by Apple servers.
  

    [12]
   

  Apple also began giving away its popular iLife (iPhoto, iMovie, Garageband) and iWork (Pages, Keynote, Numbers) apps with the device.
 
  On June 8, 2015, it was announced at the
  
   WWDC
  
  that the iPad Air would support most of
  
   iOS 9
  
  's new features when it is released in Q3 2015.
  

    [13]
   

  Air users with iOS 9 will be able to take advantage of two features called Slide Over and Picture in Picture. Slide Over allows a user to "slide" a second app in from the side of the screen in a smaller window, and have it display information alongside the initial app. Picture in Picture allows a user to watch video in a small, resizable, moveable window while remaining in another app. Another feature, dubbed Split View (which allows the user to run two apps simultaneously in a 50/50 view), will not be supported by the Air, instead it will only run on
  
   iPad Air 2
  
  .
 
  The iPad Air marks the first major design change for the iPad since the
  
   iPad 2
  
  ; it now has a thinner design that is 7.5 millimeters thick and has a smaller screen bezel similar to the
  
   iPad Mini
  
  . Apple reduced the overall volume for the iPad Air by using thinner components resulting in a 22% reduction in weight over the iPad 2.
  

    [14]
   

  Though it still uses the same 9.7-inch Retina Display as the previous iPad model,
  

    [15]
   

  an improved front-facing camera makes using FaceTime much clearer.
  

    [16]
   

  The new front-facing camera is capable of video in 720p HD, includes face detection, and
  
   backside illumination
  
  . The rear camera received an upgrade as well; now being called the
  
   iSight
  
  camera, in addition to the same functions as the front camera it also contains a 5MP
  
   CMOS
  
  ,
  
   hybrid IR filter
  
  and a fixed ƒ/2.4 aperture.
  

    [17]
   

  The device is available in space gray and silver colors.
 
  As with previous generations, Apple continued to use recyclable materials. The enclosure of the iPad Air is milled from a solid block of aluminum making it 100% recyclable. The iPad Air is also free of harmful materials such as
  
   BFRs
  
  and
  
   PVC
  
  .
  

    [14]
   


  Although the Air inherits most of the same hardware components from the
  
   iPhone 5S
  
  , such as its
  
   64-bit
  

   Apple A7
  
  system-on-chip and
  
   Apple M7
  
  motion processor, it uses the same home button that was built in previous iPad models and therefore does not support
  
   Touch ID
  
  and fingerprint sensor. The A7 present in the iPad Air is slightly different however, in that it does not use a
  
   PoP
  
  design which stacks the RAM on top of the SoC.
  

    [18]
   

  It also features a metal heat spreader to compensate for the slightly faster clock speed and better thermal management. The Air also includes a 5 megapixel rear-facing camera, a FaceTime HD front-facing camera, support for
  
   802.11n
  
  , and an estimated 10 hours of battery life.
  

    [15]
   

  It boots faster than any previous iPad model.
  

    [19]
   


  As with all previous generations of iPhone and iPad hardware, there are four buttons and one switch on the iPad Air. With the device in its portrait orientation, these are: a "home" button on the face of the device under the display that returns the user to the home screen, a
  
   wake/sleep
  
  button on the top edge of the device, and two buttons on the upper right side of the device performing
  
   volume up/down
  
  functions, under which is a switch whose function varies according to device settings, functioning either to switch the device into or out of silent mode or to lock/unlock the orientation of the screen.
  

    [20]
   

  In addition, the WiFi only version weighs 469 grams while the cellular model weighs 478 grams – over 25% lighter than their respective predecessors.
  

    [20]
   



    [21]
   

  The display responds to other sensors: an ambient light sensor to adjust screen brightness and a 3-axis
  
   accelerometer
  
  to sense orientation and switch between
  
   portrait and landscape
  
  modes.
  

    [22]
   

  Unlike the
  
   iPhone
  
  and
  
   iPod Touch
  
  's built-in applications, which work in three orientations (portrait, landscape-left and landscape-right), the iPad's built-in applications support
  
   screen rotation
  
  in all four orientations, including upside-down. Consequently, the device has no intrinsic "native" orientation; only the relative position of the home button changes.
  

    [20]
   


  The iPad Air was available with 16, 32, 64 or 128 GB of internal
  
   flash memory
  
  , with no expansion option. Apple also sells a "camera connection kit" with an
  
   SD card
  
  reader, but it can only be used to transfer photos and videos.
  

    [20]
   

  As of the announcement of the iPad Pro 9.7-Inch on March 21, 2016, the iPad Air was discontinued.
 
  All models can connect to a
  
   wireless LAN
  
  and offer dual band Wi-Fi support. The tablet is also manufactured either with or without the capability to communicate over a
  
   cellular network
  
  . The iPad Air (and the iPad Mini 2) cellular model comes in two variants, both of which support nano-SIMs, quad-band GSM, penta-band UMTS, and dual-band CDMA EV-DO Rev. A and B. Additionally, one variant also supports LTE bands 1-5, 7, 8, 13, 17-20, 25 and 26 while the other variant supports LTE bands 1-3, 5, 7, 8, 18-20 and
  
   TD-LTE
  
  bands 38, 39 and 40. Apple's ability to handle many different bands in one device allowed it to offer, for the first time, a single iPad variant which supports all the cellular bands and technologies deployed by all the major North American wireless providers at the time of the device's introduction.
 
  The audio playback of the iPad Air is in stereo with two speakers located on either side of the
  
   Lightning
  
  connector.
 
  The iPad Air has received mainly positive reviews. Writing for
  
   AnandTech
  
  ,
  
   Anand Lal Shimpi
  
  writes that the iPad Air "feels like a true successor to the iPad 4," praising it for its reduced weight and size. Shimpi further states that the Air "hits a balance of features, design and ergonomics that I don’t think we’ve ever seen in the iPad."
  

    [23]
   

  UK Editor-in-Chief of
  
   TechRadar
  
  , Patrick Goss, gave the iPad Air a positive review, giving praise to the A7 chip and camera upgrades, as well as the crisp and colorful display. He concludes by stating: "It's hard to put into words how much Apple has improved the iPad, offering a stunning level of detail and power with a build quality that's unrivalled."
  

    [24]
   

  Christina Bonnington of
  
   Wired
  
  awarded the Air a rating of 8 out of 10, calling the performance "outstanding" and noting that high-definition video streams and gaming animations are "smooth and stutter free." She also praised the loading speeds of the web browsers.
 
  Bonnington criticized the speakers for being slightly muddled.
  

    [25]
   

  Apple Inc. co-founder
  
   Steve Wozniak
  
  criticized the focus on decreasing size and weight rather than increasing storage space and stated that he did not want an iPad Air as it did not fit his personal needs.
  

    [26]
   



    [27]
   

  Dave Smith of
  
   International Business Times
  
  wrote two less positive reviews for the Air, arguing that while the device is nice, it does not bring anything new to the iPad. Smith strongly criticized the lack of
  
   Touch ID
  
  , and noted that the updates, such as the increased speed and the decreased size and weight, are only slight improvements.
  

    [28]
   



    [29]
   


  The launch date for the iPad Air did not see as large of a turnout as usual for Apple products; however, this was expected by analysts due to the delayed release of the iPad Mini 2.
  

    [30]
   

  The Air sold out in
  
   Hong Kong
  
  two hours after becoming available online.
  

    [31]
   

