


       Bluetooth 4.2
      

  The
  
   iPad Air 2
  
  is the second-generation
  
   iPad
  
  Air, or theoretically the sixth-generation of iPad
  
   tablet computer
  
  designed, developed, and marketed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  It was announced on October 16, 2014 alongside the
  
   iPad Mini 3
  
  , both of which were released on October 22, 2014. The iPad Air 2 is thinner and faster than its predecessor, the
  
   iPad Air
  
  , and features
  
   Touch ID
  
  with the height and screen size the same as the iPad Air.
 
  Its successor, the
  
   iPad (7th generation)
  
  , was announced on March 21, 2017, and the iPad Air 2 was discontinued at the same time, along with the
  
   iPad Mini 2
  
  .
  

    [5]
   




  The iPad Air 2 was announced during a keynote on October 16, 2014, and the theme of the keynote was "it's been way too long".
  

    [6]
   

  The Air 2 began arriving in retail stores on October 22, 2014. The slogan for the device was
  
   Change Is in the Air.
  
  With the release of the new
  
   iPad Pro
  
  the slogan for the device was changed to
  
   Light. Heavyweight.
  

  The iPad Air 2 ships with the iOS 10 (formerly iOS 8, later iOS 9) operating system pre-installed and includes a version of
  
   Apple Pay
  
  with the in-store
  
   NFC
  
  functionality removed. The included Touch ID sensor allows the user to pay for items online without needing to enter the user's card details.
 
  iOS 10 comes with several built-in applications, which are Camera, Photos, Messages,
  
   FaceTime
  
  , Mail, Music,
  
   Safari
  
  , Maps,
  
   Siri
  
  , Calendar,
  
   iTunes Store
  
  ,
  
   App Store
  
  , Notes, Contacts,
  
   iBooks
  
  , Home,
  
   Reminders
  
  , Clock, Videos,
  
   News
  
  ,
  
   Photo Booth
  
  and Podcasts. The
  
   Apple App Store
  
  , a digital
  
   application
  

   distribution
  
  platform for iOS, allows users to browse and download
  
   applications
  
  made by various developers from the
  
   iTunes Store
  
  . Additional apps made by Apple itself are available for free download, which are
  
   iMovie
  
  ,
  
   GarageBand
  
  ,
  
   iTunes U
  
  ,
  
   Find My iPhone
  
  ,
  
   Find My Friends
  
  , Apple Store, Trailers, Remote, and the
  
   iWork
  
  apps (
  
   Pages
  
  ,
  
   Keynote
  
  , and
  
   Numbers
  
  ).
  

    [7]
   

  Like all
  
   iOS
  
  devices, the iPad Air 2 can also sync content and other data with a Mac or PC using iTunes. Although the tablet is not designed to make phone calls over a cellular network, it can place and receive phone calls through an iPhone's cellular connection, using Apple's
  
   Continuity
  
  feature
  

    [8]
   

  (supported on
  
   iOS 8
  
  and later versions of iOS, and
  
   OS X Yosemite
  
  and later versions of
  
   macOS
  
  ), or using a
  
   VoIP
  
  application, such as
  
   Skype
  
  .
 
  On June 8, 2015, it was announced at the
  
   WWDC
  
  that the iPad Air 2 would support all of
  
   iOS 9
  
  's new features when it is released in Q3 2015.
  

    [9]
   

  Air 2 users with iOS 9 will be able to use Slide Over, Picture in Picture and Split View. Slide Over allows a user to "slide" a second app in from the side of the screen in a smaller window, and have it display information alongside the initial app. Picture in Picture allows a user to watch video in a small, resizable, moveable window while remaining in another app. Split View allows a user to run two apps simultaneously in a 50/50 view.
  

    [10]
   


       iPad Air 2 is 6.1mm compared to the iPad Air 7.5mm design
      
  The iPad Air 2 inherits hardware that is similar to that which is in both the
  
   iPhone 6
  
  and
  
   iPhone 6 Plus
  
  . One major change is its processor, the
  
   Apple A8X
  
  which is the high-end 3-core variant of the
  
   Apple A8
  
  . The iPad Air 2 has 2 GB RAM (making the iPad Air 2 the first iOS device to have more than 1 GB RAM) and the PowerVR GPU has 8 cores.
  

    [11]
   

  It also uses the
  
   Apple M8
  
  motion co-processor which has a barometer and is the first generation of the iPad to inherit the fingerprint Touch ID sensor from the
  
   iPhone
  
  . In addition, compared to the iPad Air, it includes an improved 8-megapixel (3264×2448) rear-facing camera with 10
  
   fps
  

   burst mode
  
  and slow motion video at 120 fps, similar to the
  
   iPhone 5S
  
  camera capabilities. The front-facing FaceTime HD camera has also been improved with a larger ƒ/2.2 aperture, which allows 81% more light in the image.
  

    [12]
   

  Apple added a gold option to the existing silver and space gray color choices for the iPad Air 2, the previous existing colors were used on the preceding iPad Air.
 
  Unlike its iPad predecessors, the mute/orientation lock switch has been removed to accommodate the reduced depth. Instead, the user must use the Control Center to access these functions.
 
  It has a slightly smaller battery compared to the iPad Air but Apple claims the same 10-hour battery life as before. The iPad Air 2 is available in 32 or 128 GB storage options with no storage expansion options. Apple has released a "camera connection kit" with an
  
   SD card
  
  reader, but it can only be used to transfer photos and videos to an iPad.
  

    [13]
   



   The Verge
  
  called the Air 2 "the best tablet ever made," giving it a score of 9.3 out of 10 while noting that it offered only "iterative improvement" and that there were "missed opportunities" in its design.
  

    [14]
   

