


   Round Rock
  
  is a city in the
  
   U.S. state
  
  of
  
   Texas
  
  , located in
  
   Williamson County
  
  (with a small part in
  
   Travis
  
  ),
  

    [4]
   

  which is a part of the
  
   Greater Austin, Texas
  
  metropolitan area. The population was 99,887 at the
  
   2010 census
  
  .
 
  The city straddles both sides of the
  
   Balcones Escarpment
  
  ,
  

    [5]
   

  a fault line in which the areas roughly east of IH-35 are flat and characterized by having black, fertile soils of the
  
   Blackland Prairie
  
  , and the west side of the Escarpment which consists mostly of hilly,
  
   karst-like
  
  terrain with little topsoil and higher elevations and which is part of the
  
   Texas Hill Country
  
  . Located about 20 miles (32 km) north of downtown Austin, Round Rock shares a common border with
  
   Austin
  
  at
  
   Texas State Highway 45
  
  .
 
  In August 2008,
  

    Money
   

  magazine named Round Rock as the seventh-best American small city in which to live.
  

    [6]
   

  Round Rock was the only Texas city to make the Top 10. In a CNN article dated July 1, 2009, Round Rock was listed as the second fastest-growing city in the country, with a population growth of 8.2% in the preceding year.
  

    [7]
   


  Round Rock has a strong public education system.
  

    [8]
   

  According to the 2008 ratings from the Texas Education Agency, the
  
   Round Rock Independent School District
  
  (RRISD) ranks among the best in the state. Of 42 schools within it, twelve were rated exemplary and eleven are recognized.
 
  Round Rock is perhaps best known as the international headquarters of
  
   Dell
  
  , which employs approximately 16,000 people at its Round Rock facilities.
  

    [9]
   

  The presence of Dell along with other major employers,
  

    [10]
   

  a strong economic development program, favorable tax rates, and major retailers such as
  
   IKEA
  
  and a
  
   Premium Outlet Mall
  
  , and the mixed use
  
   La Frontera
  
  center, have changed Round Rock from a sleepy
  
   bedroom community
  


    [11]
   

  into its own self-contained "super suburb."
  

    [12]
   




  Round Rock and Williamson County have been the site of human habitation since at least 9,200 BC. The earliest known inhabitants of the area lived during the late
  
   Pleistocene
  
  (Ice Age), and are linked to the
  
   Clovis culture
  
  around 9,200 BC (11,200 years old) based on evidence found at the much-studied "Gault Site," midway between
  
   Georgetown
  
  and
  
   Fort Hood
  
  .
  

    [13]
   

  One of the most important discoveries in recent times is that of the ancient skeletal remains dubbed "The Leanderthal Lady" because of its age and proximity to
  
   Leander, Texas
  
  .
  

    [14]
   

  The site is 4 miles (6 km) west of Round Rock and was discovered by accident by
  
   Texas Department of Transportation
  
  workers while drilling core samples for a new highway. The site has been extensively studied for many years and samples carbon date to this particular
  
   Pleistocene
  
  period at approximately 10,500 years ago (8,500 BC). Prehistoric and
  
   Archaic Period
  
  "open occupation" campsites are also found throughout the county along streams and other water sources including Brushy Creek in Round Rock and the
  
   San Gabriel River
  
  in Georgetown, ten miles (16 km) north.
  

    [15]
   

  These archeology dig sites show a much greater volume
  
   United Sates of America
  
  evidence of Archaic Period inhabitants based on relics and flint tools recovered from burned rock
  
   middens
  
  . The earliest known "historical" Native American occupants, the
  
   Tonkawa
  
  , were a flint-working, hunting people who followed the buffalo on foot and periodically set fire to the prairie to aid them in their hunts. During the 18th century they made the transition to a horse culture and used firearms to a limited extent. There also appear to have been small numbers of
  
   Kiowa
  
  ,
  
   Yojuane
  
  ,
  
   Tawakoni
  
  , and
  
   Mayeye
  
  Native-Americans living in the county at the time of the earliest Anglo settlements.
  

    [16]
   

  After they were crowded out by white settlement, the
  
   Comanches
  
  continued to raid settlements in the county until the 1860s. In the late 19th century, Native Americans were being pushed out of Central Texas.
 
  As the area developed into a rural Anglo community, some of the modern paved roads actually followed the original Native-American pathways. One famous immigration route passed through Round Rock and is called the "Double File Trail" because the path was wide enough for two horsemen to ride side-by-side. It is part of a longer trail from north Texas that crossed the San Gabriel River in Georgetown, Brushy Creek in Round Rock, and the Colorado River in Austin.
  

    [17]
   

  An elementary school in the Round Rock school district is named for the trail, Double File Trail Elementary School.
 
  In 1851, a small community was formed on the banks of Brushy Creek, near a large round and anvil-shaped rock located in the middle of the creek. This round rock marked a convenient low-water crossing for wagons, horses, and cattle. The first postmaster called the community "Brushy," and the creek was called
  
   "Brushy Creek"
  
  . But in 1854, at the suggestion of the postmaster, the small settlement was renamed Round Rock in honor of this now famous rock. After the Civil War,
  
   Jesse Chisholm
  
  began moving cattle from South Texas through Round Rock on the way to
  
   Abilene, Kansas
  
  . The route he established, which crossed Brushy Creek at the round rock, became known as the
  
   Chisholm Trail
  
  .
  

    [18]
   

  Most of the old buildings, including the old Saint Charles Hotel, have been preserved. This historic area is now called "Old Town."
  

    [19]
   


  Downtown Round Rock was the site of an historic gunfight and subsequent capture (and death) of the 19th-century American train robber
  
   Sam Bass
  
  ,
  

    [20]
   

  by the Texas Ranger Division on July 19, 1878. The Rangers followed Bass and his gang after they robbed the
  
   Fort Worth
  
  -to-Cleburne train. Bass was tracked to Round Rock and as he attempted to flee, Bass was shot and killed in a gun battle by Ranger George Herold and Ranger sergeant Richard Ware. Near Ware was
  
   Soapy Smith
  
  , a noted con man, and his cousin Edwin, who witnessed Ware's shot. Soapy exclaimed, "I think you got him."
  

    [21]
   

  The event is known locally as the "Sam Bass Shootout."
  

    [22]
   

  This shootout is re-created each year at the July 4 'Frontier Days' Celebration in Old Settlers Park. Bass is buried in Round Rock Cemetery, located northwest of "Old Town" on Sam Bass Road. His original headstone can be found on display at the Round Rock Public Library.
  

    [23]
   


  In the first half of the 20th century the county's wealth came from the cotton fields.
  

    [24]
   


   Cotton
  
  , row-crops, grapes, and truck farming were the predominant subsistence east of
  
   Interstate 35
  
  . West of the Balcones divide ranchers raised cattle, sheep and to a lesser extent goats.
  

    [25]
   

  Due to Round Rock's favorable geographic location over the rich, fertile "
  
   blackland prairie
  
  " soils also known locally as the "black waxy"
  

    [26]
   

  (due to the soil's high clay content), cotton was the largest economic driver at that time. Because of the soil and climate, this eco-region is ideally suited to crop agriculture. Nearby
  
   Taylor, Texas
  
  , east of Round Rock, was the primary cotton center where the crop was hauled for
  
   ginning
  
  (its seeds mechanically removed) at the
  
   cotton gin
  
  , compressed into bales, and shipped by train. Austin was also a cotton center for a time once the railroad arrived there in the 1870s.
  

    [27]
   

  Cotton production and cattle raising, on a much smaller scale, continues today although primarily east of Round Rock.
 
  To preserve the heritage of the famous crossing, a Chisholm Trail Crossing Park was developed to provide visitors with a simulated scene of Round Rock's historical role in the Chisholm cattle drive. Commemorative plaques in the park tell of the history of Round Rock. The bronze sculptures of four steers and pioneer woman Hattie Cluck and her son, Emmitt, were commissioned by the city through donations from Round Rock residents. The sculptures depict Round Rock's history as a crossing location along the Chisholm Trail.
  
   [
   


      clarification needed
     


   ]
  


    [28]
   

  The project plans include 18 to 20 additional bronze statues over time.
 
  Following the end of the
  
   American Civil War
  
  a group of Confederate veterans held a reunion in
  
   Georgetown
  
  on August 27, 1904, for the old settlers of
  
   Williamson County
  
  and their descendants. The invitation promised "good music, plenty to eat, and above all a warm welcome." The event was well-attended, and reunions — now called Old Settlers Association (OSA) reunions — have been held annually ever since. After the initial one, the event was moved to Round Rock and eventually a structure was built (along with three restored log cabins) in the Palm Valley area of Round Rock, in front of Old Settlers Park, just off Highway 79 in east Round Rock. All members of the organization are descendants of Williamson County residents prior to 1904. OSA has approximately 50 active members and 300 members total.
  

    [29]
   

  The Old Settlers Association today is a social and educational group, with the purpose of facilitating social activities, as well as collecting and preserving important historical information and facts. The facilities are rented for meetings, arts and craft and collectable shows, events, parties, weddings and rehearsal dinners.
  

    [30]
   


  In the 1950s,
  
   Taylor
  
  was the economic powerhouse in the county due to it being the center of cotton production and shipping and had a large population. So it was expected, then, that the proposed
  
   Interstate 35
  
  , part of the new
  
   Interstate Highway System
  
  would pass through Taylor on its way from
  
   Dallas
  
  to
  
   Austin
  
  . In fact, the original routing plans drawn by Highway Commissioner
  
   DeWitt Greer
  
  called for the "
  
   interregional
  
  " highway to go through Taylor. Some of the citizens and leadership of Taylor lobbied
  
   against
  
  the Taylor route citing multiple concerns ranging from the loss of farmland, to unwanted right of way (ROW) acquisition — it was proposed to be an astounding 300 feet (90 m) wide, unheard of before this time—the possibility of cutting farmers off from their fields or having their fields be located on opposite sides of the road, traffic noise, and loss of country life. No one even knew what an "Interregional Highway" would look like. Instead they wanted improvements to the
  
   farm-to-market roads
  
  and a straight route to Austin.
  

    [31]
   


  Meanwhile, Round Rock leaders wanted the highway to come their way as they were focused on the potential economic development opportunities it would bring. At that time no one had ever seen such a road as an "Interstate" (unless they had traveled to Germany to see the
  
   Autobahn
  
  or Connecticut), but then-Mayor Louis Henna lobbied hard at the Highway Commission for the Round Rock route. In June 1956, the fifteen-year debate over the form, funding and route of the Interstate was resolved.
  

    [32]
   

  Due to the heavy lobbying effort, and not wanting to antagonize Taylor, the route was eventually changed and the highway was built along the edge of the
  
   Balcones Fault line
  
  running through Round Rock. The precise route was not without opposition, however, as the final route cut off "Old Town" to the west from what had become the more recent "downtown" area east of
  
   Interstate 35
  
  .
  

    [33]
   

  The Interstate eventually made Round Rock into a viable and vibrant commercial center. Due to the Interstate and the reduction in the importance of cotton as a primary crop, Taylor is today a minor, modest town with a smaller population, while Round Rock has thrived and rapidly grown into the largest city in the county, attracting companies like Dell Computer and major retail centers.
  

    [12]
   

  The transformation of Round Rock is detailed in a book by Linda Scarborough (publisher of the
  
   Williamson County Sun
  
  newspaper) titled
  
   Road, River and Ol' Boy Politics: A Texas County's Path from Farm to Supersuburb
  
  published by Texas State Historical Press.
  

    [34]
   


  By the 1990s, Round Rock was primarily a bedroom community with the majority of its employed residents working in Austin and then returning home after work to places like Round Rock and Georgetown where housing and land was less expensive. In the 1990s, Round Rock had few major employers and jobs other than local retail and other services, or ranching and farming.
  

    [11]
   

  But in the late 1990s, that began to change as
  
   economic development
  
  became a major focus of the city and the
  
   Chamber of Commerce
  
  . Dell Corporation (later renamed
  
   Dell
  
  ) moved its headquarters to Round Rock which has provided a significant number of jobs with 16,000 employees at its Round Rock headquarters .
  

    [35]
   



    [36]
   


   (See also the
   
    Business and economic development
   
   section in this article.)
  

  Round Rock is located 17 miles (27 km) north of downtown
  
   Austin
  
  , and 10 miles (16 km) south of
  
   Georgetown
  
  . Its elevation is 709 ft (216 m).
 
  According to the
  
   US Census Bureau
  
  , the city has a total area of 26.3 square miles (68.0 km
  
   2
  
  ), of which 26.1 square miles (67.7 km
  
   2
  
  ) are land and 0.1 square mile (0.3 km
  
   2
  
  ) (0.50%) is water.
  

    [37]
   


  Prior to the 2010 census, the city annexed part of the Brushy Creek CDP, increasing its total area to 35.9 square miles (93 km
  
   2
  
  ), of which, 35.6 square miles (92 km
  
   2
  
  ) of it is land and 0.3 square miles (0.78 km
  
   2
  
  ) is water.
  

    [38]
   



    [39]
   


  The climate in this area is characterized by generally hot, humid summers and mild, cool winters. According to the
  
   Köppen Climate Classification
  
  system, Round Rock has a
  
   humid subtropical climate
  
  , abbreviated "Cfa" on climate maps.
  

    [40]
   


  As of the
  
   2010 census
  
  , there were 99,887 people and 37,223 households, residing in the city. There were 37,223 housing units with 20,364 owner-occupied homes costing at a median value of $163,400. The racial makeup of the city was 76.4%
  
   White
  
  , 9.4%
  
   African American
  
  , 0.4%
  
   Native American
  
  , 4.1%
  
   Asian
  
  , 0%
  
   Pacific Islander
  
  , 5.7% from
  
   other races
  
  , and 3% from two or more races.
  
   Hispanic
  
  or
  
   Latino
  
  of any race made up 25% of its population. According to a 2009 estimate by the U.S Census Bureau, the median income for a household was $69,892, and the median income for a family was $79,417.
 
  There were 21,076 households out of which 47.5% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 60.5% were
  
   married couples
  
  living together, 11.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 24.4% were non-families. 18.1% of all households were made up of individuals and 3.0% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.87 and the average family size was 3.29.
 
  In the city, the age distribution of the population shows 31.9% under the age of 18, 8.5% from 18 to 24, 38.8% from 25 to 44, 16.3% from 45 to 64, and 4.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 30 years. For every 100 females there were 99.1 males. For every 100 women age 18 and over, there were 96.3 men.
 
  The
  
   per capita income
  
  for the city was $24,911.
 
  The City of Round Rock has maintained a high quality of life while becoming a major center for economic growth in Central Texas, with industry clusters in clean energy, advanced manufacturing, life sciences and computer/software development.
  

    [18]
   


  Round Rock has more than twenty major employers
  

    [10]
   

  including: Toppan Photomasks,
  
   Sears
  
  Customer Care,
  
   IKEA
  
  ,
  
   Round Rock Premium Outlets
  
  , KoMiCo Technology Inc., Texas Guaranteed Student Loan Corp (TGSLC),
  
   Cintas
  
  ,
  
   Dresser
  
  ,
  
   Hospira
  
  , and
  
   TECO-Westinghouse
  
  ,
  
   Cerilliant Corporation
  
  ,
  
   Emerson Process Management
  
  , and
  
   Dell
  
  .
  

    [18]
   



   Dell
  
  is a
  
   multinational
  

   computer
  
  and
  
   information technology
  
  corporation based in Round Rock, which develops, sells and supports computers and related products and services. The company employs about 11,500 people in the Round Rock facilities
  

    [36]
   

  and about 96,000 people worldwide.
  

    [44]
   

  Dell was originally based in Austin after its initial formation in 1984 as PC's Limited by UT college student
  
   Michael Dell
  
  . With the need for significant space as it expanded, the City of Round Rock in 1996 offered Dell a "Chapter 380" agreement by offering to split sales tax revenue from in-state sales 50/50 between Dell and the City. A "Chapter 380" agreement is named for the chapter in Vernon's Statutes that permits sales tax revenue sharing for
  
   economic development
  
  purposes. It was the first time such an agreement had been used in
  
   Central Texas
  
  and among the very first in the state.
  

    [45]
   

  As of 1999, approximately half of the general fund of the City of Round Rock originates from sales taxes generated from the Dell headquarters.
  

    [45]
   

  Today the company is one of the largest technology companies in the world, listed as number 38 on the
  

    Fortune 500
   

  (2010).
  

    Fortune
   

  also lists Dell as the #5 most admired company in its industry. As part of its clean energy program, in 2008 Dell switched the power sources of the Round Rock headquarters to more environmentally friendly ones, with 60% of the total power coming from
  
   TXU Energy
  
  wind farms and 40% coming from the Austin Community Landfill gas-to-energy plant operated by
  
   Waste Management, Inc
  

  Round Rock's largest commercial and office business center is
  
   La Frontera
  
  , located at the intersection of Loop 1, SH 45 and IH-35.
  
   La Frontera
  
  combines multi-tenant offices, company headquarters facilities, 1,000,000 square feet (90,000 m
  
   2
  
  ) of retail,
  

    [46]
   

  and several apartment complexes and other smaller retail and housing centers. The project also includes Williamson County's largest hotel, the Austin North
  
   Marriott
  
  , which provides space for large conferences, meetings and banquets - a first for the county and an important component of Round Rock's economic efforts.
  

    [47]
   

  The center is also home to the Texas Guaranteed Student Loan Corporation (TGSLC),
  

    [48]
   

  and
  
   Emerson Process Management
  
  . The retail portion is the second largest outdoor commercial project in the Austin - Round Rock Metro area.
  

    [49]
   

  La Frontera was developed by Bill Smalling and Don Martin, with
  
   Fort Worth
  
  financier
  
   Ed Bass
  
  as financial partner.
 
  In 2006, a retail-only hub opened in Round Rock at the corner of
  
   Interstate 35
  
  and Highway 1431 (now renamed "University Boulevard"): The major retailer center includes the
  
   Simon Property Group
  
  's Premium Outlets Mall, across the street is
  
   IKEA
  


    [50]
   

  as well as numerous other retail stores and restaurants. The project was developed by
  
   Simon Property Group
  
  , with other portions by Barshop & Oles of Austin.
 
  Round Rock is home to the Class AAA
  
   Pacific Coast League
  

   minor league baseball
  
  team
  
   Round Rock Express
  
  ,
  

    [51]
   

  owned by RSR Sports (Nolan Ryan, Don Sanders, Reid Ryan) and was founded by Reid Ryan, son of Baseball Hall of Famer
  
   Nolan Ryan
  
  . As of August 2010, Nolan Ryan is also the new owner of the major league Texas Rangers ball club.
  

    [52]
   

  Home games for the Round Rock Express are played at the
  
   Dell Diamond
  
  , a facility that is owned by the City of Round Rock and leased long-term to RSR Sports who run and maintain the facility.
 
  Round Rock opened a free public skate park in 2007
  

    [53]
   

  behind the Clay Madsen Recreation Center on Gattis School Road.
  

    [54]
   


  Round Rock is the self-proclaimed "Sports Capital of Texas."
  

    [55]
   

  The City's Old Settlers Park offers a professionally designed disc golf course, cricket, twenty-field baseball complex, five-field softball complex, and seven soccer facilities in addition to the Rockin' River Family Aquatic Center.
  

    [56]
   


  The Round Rock independent school district high schools are known for their accomplishments in sports as well, specifically Stony Point high school for being the state semi-finalists 3 years in a row and the second most winning 5A program in the state of Texas.
 
  The city of Round Rock is managed through a council-manager form of government. The City Council is composed of six city council members and the mayor. The mayor and all council members are elected at large and serve the entire city, not by geographic precincts. The mayor pro tem is appointed annually by council members.
  

    [57]
   

  City Council positions are not full-time jobs. The council appoints a full-time city manager who manages the daily affairs of the city, and all council meetings are held at 221 E. Main Street, in downtown Round Rock, on the second and fourth Thursday of each month at 7 p.m., unless indicated otherwise. Council meetings are televised.
  

    [58]
   


  The Commissioners Court
  

    [59]
   

  is the overall governing and management body of
  
   Williamson County
  
  , consisting of five members. The county judge presides as chairman over the court, and is elected every four years by all voters in the county. Four commissioners are elected by single-member precincts every four years. While the majority of Round Rock is within Precinct 1, all four precincts include some portions of the city.
  
   (See
   
    Williamson County, Texas
   
   article for more detail.)
  


   Municipal utility districts
  
  , commonly referred to as "MUDs", play a significant role in Round Rock. Each is a special-purpose district that provides
  
   public utilities
  
  such as water,
  
   wastewater
  
  ,
  
   storm water
  
  , and sometimes roads,
  
   parks
  
  ,
  
   solid waste
  
  , and other infrastructure and services to the residents of each district. MUDs are typically formed by a
  
   residential developer
  
  as a means to install utilities and roads to a project when a city is not ready or able to provide them. The developer gets reimbursed over time from the fees levied by the MUD, and at some point the area may be
  
   annexed
  
  by the city to bring the development into the city's tax base once the basic infrastructure costs are paid off.
  

    [61]
   

  The MUD is represented by its own
  
   board of directors
  
  who are voted on by the residents of the district, and it has the authority to condemn land, add additional land area, and levy fees in lieu of property taxes to maintain the utilities and other facilities.
 
  There are currently ten MUDs in Round Rock: Brushy Creek, Fern Bluff, Highlands at Mayfield Ranch, Meadows at Chandler Creek, Paloma Lake, Parkside at Mayfield Ranch, Siena, Teravista, Vista Oaks, and Walsh Ranch. Total population living within these MUDs is 47,648 (2010 city estimate).
  

    [62]
   


  Round Rock's largest district is
  
   Brushy Creek Municipal Utility District
  
  .
  

    [63]
   

  Brushy Creek MUD was formed as Williamson County Municipal Utility District No. 2 in October 1977 with 725 acres (2.9 km
  
   2
  
  ) of land. An annexation in 1983 increased the District to 2,210 acres (8.9 km
  
   2
  
  ). The district name was changed to Brushy Creek Municipal Utility District on August 1990. The MUD provides a wide range of city-like services including parks and recreation, full utilities, road maintennance and a
  
   Home Owner's Association
  
  . Services a MUD can offer, however are also limited by law (for example they cannot offer library services).
 
  Another similar but somewhat smaller MUD in Round Rock's is
  
   Fern Bluff Municipal Utility District
  


    [64]
   

  in the Wyoming Springs area of town. Both MUDs play a significant role in local governance and maintenance of basic utilities.
 
  From time to time there have been very contentious elections to the boards and heated debates regarding other MUD issues.
  

    [65]
   

  Round Rock does not often annex a MUD in order to avoiding having to take on the aging infrastructure replacement and upkeep costs.
 

   Round Rock Independent School District
  
  , a
  
   Texas Education Agency
  
  Recognized School District, is located in southern
  
   Williamson County
  
  and northwest
  
   Travis County
  
  and includes all the City of Round Rock and portions of the
  
   City of Austin
  
  and the City of
  
   Cedar Park
  
  .
  

    [8]
   

  The area covers 110 square miles (280 km
  
   2
  
  ) encompassing high-tech manufacturing and urban retail centers, suburban neighborhoods, and farm and ranch land. "Roughly 45,000 students attend the district's five high schools, ten middle schools, 32 elementary schools, and two alternative learning centers. During the past five years, the number of students has increased by nearly 15%, and enrollment continues to grow by more than 1,200 students per year."
  

    [66]
   


  In August 2010, the district opened its fifth high school (
  
   Cedar Ridge High School
  
  ), a ninth grade center reverted to a middle school and the district's 31st elementary school opened in the Stone Oak subdivision. "The average student-teacher ratio for RRISD is 16. The annual dropout rate for students in grades 7 – 12 is 1.1% and more than 77% of the district's graduating seniors take the SAT and ACT college entrance exams, scoring well above state and national averages."
  

    [66]
   

  The property tax rates are significantly higher than the national average, and the schools' performance reflects the tax dollars invested.
 
  In the annual report released July 30, 2010 the
  
   Round Rock Independent School District
  
  received the highest possible rating ("Exemplary") for twenty five of its schools, the highest number so rated in any of the suburban districts in Central Texas. These schools are: Westwood High School. Canyon Vista, Walsh, and Cedar Valley middle schools. Spicewood, Forest North, Caraway, Brushy Creek, Laurel Mountain, Fern Bluff, Canyon Creek, Great Oaks, Teravista, Cactus Ranch, Sommer, Deep Wood, Robertson, Pond Springs, Live Oak, Old Town, Jollyville, Forest Creek, Blackland Prairie, Union Hill and Gattis elementary schools. In 2010 the school district as a whole was rated "
  
   academically recognized
  
  " a significant step above 2009 when the school district was rated "
  
   academically acceptable
  
  " by the
  
   Texas Education Agency
  
  .
  

    [67]
   


  Round Rock also has a number of higher education opportunities. In 1990, the city, under the leadership of then-City Manager Bob Bennett, planning director Joe Vining, and local citizen Mike Swayze envisioned and oversaw creation of the
  
   Texas State University Round Rock Campus
  
  (a/k/a Round Rock Higher Education Center - "RRHEC"). The concept was envisioned as a way to lure colleges and universities to jointly provide education, training and degree opportunities on a part-time and full-time bases. The RRC used various empty facilities around town and many of the initial training programs were targeted to help educate students for work at local companies, such as Dell, which had specialized needs. In 2008, an educational campus and the first RRC building—the Avery Building—was opened through the combined efforts of
  
   Texas State University
  
  ,
  
   Austin Community College
  
  , and
  
   Temple College
  
  in order to provide a broader range of educational opportunities, specialized training, and varying degree programs including post graduate degrees. The campus is in the heart of the emerging Avery Center development which houses Seton Williamson, the A&M Health Science Center and other medical campuses. By the end of 2009 1,700 students were enrolled in the programs.
  
   Texas State University
  
  has taken on the lead role in this effort and 100 acres (40 ha) of land for the facility and additional buildings was donated by the Avery family of Round Rock, whose family were early settlers on the land surrounding the RRHEC. Construction on the second Texas State campus building is underway and construction is nearly complete on this additional classroom building.
  

    [68]
   


   (See also
   
    Texas State University Round Rock Campus
   
   )
  

  The city is also home to the
  
   Texas A&M Health Science Center
  
  Round Rock which opened its doors December 2010.
  

    [69]
   

  The campus is designed to eventually accommodate as many as 17 additional buildings over time as monies are appropriated each biennium by the
  
   Texas Legislature
  
  .
  

    [70]
   


  In August 2010,
  
   Austin Community College
  
  's largest campus to date opened adjacent to the Texas State University center.
  

    [71]
   



    [72]
   

  ACC is currently constructing five additional buildings with a total of 250,000 square feet (23,000 m
  
   2
  
  ) to accommodate up to 5,000 students in its first phase. All three campuses are adjacent to each other within the burgeoning Avery Farms development.
  

    [73]
   


  The newest component of higher education is the
  
   School of Nursing
  
  at
  
   Texas State University
  
  , housed within the University's College of Health Professions. Other programs that are offered by the college are health information management, health services research, and physical therapy.
  

    [74]
   



    [75]
   


  In November 2006, the
  
   Central Texas Regional Mobility Authority
  
  (CTRMA)
  

    [76]
   

  opened the first segment of the region's first
  
   toll road
  
  system. Both
  
   State Highway 130
  
  and
  
   State Highway 45
  
  toll roads run through portions of Round Rock and provide greatly increased mobility to the city, albeit with strong regional opposition to the high-toll charges to motorists.
  
   State Highway 130
  
  runs just south of
  
   Austin Bergstrom International Airport
  
  at US Highway 183 and connecting to
  
   Interstate 35
  
  north of
  
   Georgetown
  
  , and passes through the easternmost portion of Round Rock. It provides Round Rock residents with quick access to the Austin airport for about $6 each way. The project, when completed, will end at
  
   Interstate 10
  
  just east of
  
   Seguin
  
  , about 30 miles (50 km) east-northeast of
  
   San Antonio
  
  essentially creating a parallel roadway to
  
   Interstate 35
  
  .
 

   State Highway 45
  
  is part of an eventual loop that runs east from State Highway 183 in
  
   Cedar Park
  
  to 130 at
  
   Pflugerville
  
  (east of Round Rock) where it merges with the SH 130 toll road, and then intercects with the southern portion of SH 45 near Buda, south of Austin. SH 45 passes through the entire southern portion of Round Rock. Highway 45 provides much faster access between Round Rock and Austin, alleviating what was previously a major bottleneck at
  
   Interstate 35
  
  . The project includes a tolled extension to
  
   Loop 1
  
  (also known locally as the
  
   "Mopac Expressway"
  
  ) and allows direct access from to I-35 to Loop 1 by use of flyover connections rather than ground level intersections. The toll roads also provide access to the
  
   Dell
  
  headquarters and its considerable number of employees. Together, both toll roads significantly improve mobility in Round Rock.
 
  Round Rock played a major role in the creation of SH 45 through constant pressure on the
  
   Texas Department of Transportation
  
  to make it a priority project, the purchase of right of way, and other assistance at critical early stages. Robert L. "Bob" Bennett, who was Round Rock City Manager at the time, oversaw the project for the city. Bennett, now retired, served as a founding member of CTRMA board of directors as an appointee of Williamson County in 2003.
  

    [77]
   

  Former Williamson County Commissioner and former Round Rock City Councilman Mike Heiligenstein is the Executive Director of the CTRMA.
  

    [78]
   


  Round Rock has a wide array of hospitals and extensive health care services. Many of these facilities serve not only Round Rock, but the greater Williamson county area, as well as North Austin.
  

    [79]
   

