


   Winston-Salem
  
  is a city in and the
  
   county seat
  
  of
  
   Forsyth County
  
  ,
  
   North Carolina
  
  ,
  
   United States
  
  .
  

    [4]
   

  With a 2015 estimated population of 241,218, it is the second largest municipality in the
  
   Piedmont Triad
  
  region and the fifth largest city in the state.
  

    [2]
   

  Winston-Salem is home to the tallest office building in the region,
  
   100 North Main Street
  
  , formerly the Wachovia Building and now known locally as the Wells Fargo Center.
 
  Winston-Salem is called the "Twin City" for its dual heritage and "City of the Arts and Innovation" for its dedication to fine arts and theater and technological research. "Camel City" is a reference to the city's historic involvement in the
  
   tobacco industry
  
  related to locally based
  
   R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
  
  's
  
   Camel
  
  cigarettes. Winston-Salem is also known for its traditional furniture company. Many locals refer to the city as "Winston" in informal speech. "The Dash" is referenced from the hyphen between Winston and Salem and was popularized by the nickname of the local minor league baseball team, the
  
   Winston-Salem Dash
  
  .
 
  In 2012, the city was listed among the 10 best places to retire in the U.S. by
  
   CBS MoneyWatch
  
  .
  

    [5]
   




  The city of Winston-Salem is a product of the merging of the two neighboring towns of Winston and Salem in 1913.
 
  The origin of the town of Salem dates to January 1753, when Bishop
  
   August Gottlieb Spangenberg
  
  , on behalf of the
  
   Moravian Church
  
  , selected a settlement site in the three forks of Muddy Creek. He called this area "die Wachau" (
  
   Latin
  
  form:
  
   Wachovia
  
  ) named after the ancestral estate of
  
   Count Nicolaus Ludwig von Zinzendorf
  
  . The land, just short of 99,000 acres (400 km
  
   2
  
  ), was subsequently purchased from
  
   John Carteret, 2nd Earl Granville
  
  .
 
  On November 17, 1753, the first settlers arrived at what would later become the town of Bethabara. This town, despite its rapid growth, was not designed to be the primary settlement on the tract. Some residents expanded to a nearby settlement called Bethania in 1759. Finally, lots were drawn to select among suitable sites for the location of a new town.
 
  The town established on the chosen site was given the name of Salem (from "Shalom" meaning "Peace",after the Canaanite city mentioned in the
  
   Book of Genesis
  
  ) chosen for it by the Moravians' late patron, Count
  
   Zinzendorf
  
  . On January 6, 1766, the first tree was felled for the building of Salem. Salem was a typical Moravian settlement congregation with the public buildings of the congregation grouped around a central square, today Salem Square. These included the church, a Brethren's House and a Sisters' House for the unmarried members of the Congregation, which owned all the property in town. For many years only members of the Moravian Church were permitted to live in the settlement. This practice had ended by the
  
   American Civil War
  
  . Many of the original buildings in the settlement have been restored or rebuilt and are now part of Old Salem Museums & Gardens.
  

    [6]
   


  Salem was incorporated as a town in December 1856.
  

    [7]
   

  Salem Square and "
  
   God's Acre
  
  ", the Moravian Graveyard, since 1772 are the site each
  
   Easter
  
  morning of the world-famous Moravian
  
   sunrise service
  
  . This service, sponsored by all the Moravian church parishes in the city, attracts thousands of worshipers each year.
 
  In 1849, the Salem congregation sold land north of Salem to the newly formed Forsyth County for a county seat. The new town was called "the county town" or Salem until 1851 when it was named Winston for a local hero of the Revolutionary War,
  
   Joseph Winston
  
  .
  

    [8]
   

  For its first two decades, Winston was a sleepy county town. In 1868, work began by Salem and Winston business leaders to connect the town to the North Carolina Railroad.
  

    [9]
   

  That same year, Thomas Jethro Brown of Davie County rented a former livery stable and established the first tobacco warehouse in Winston. That same year, Pleasant Henderson Hanes, also of Davie, built his first tobacco factory a few feet from Brown's warehouse. In 1875, Richard Joshua Reynolds, of Patrick County, Virginia, built his first tobacco factory a few hundred feet from Hanes's factory. By the 1880s, there were almost 40 tobacco factories in the town of Winston. Hanes and Reynolds would compete fiercely for the next 25 years, each absorbing a number of the smaller manufacturers, until Hanes sold out to Reynolds in 1900 to begin a second career in textiles.
 
  In the 1880s, the US Post Office began referring to the two towns as Winston-Salem. In 1899, after nearly a decade of contention, the
  
   United States Post Office Department
  
  established the Winston-Salem post office in Winston, with the former Salem office serving as a branch. After a referendum the towns were officially incorporated as "Winston-Salem" in 1913. The USPS Address Information System (AIS) does not recognize the
  
   hyphen
  
  .
  

    [10]
   

  Ironically, the sign hanging on the USPS location in downtown Winston-Salem reads "United States Postal Service, Winston-Salem, NC."
 
  The
  
   Reynolds family
  
  , namesake of the
  
   R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
  
  , played a large role in the history and public life of Winston-Salem. By the 1940s, 60% of Winston-Salem workers worked either for Reynolds or in the Hanes textile factories.
  

    [11]
   

  The Reynolds company imported so much French cigarette paper and Turkish tobacco for
  
   Camel cigarettes
  
  that Winston-Salem was designated by the United States federal government as an official port of entry for the United States, despite the city being 200 miles (320 km) inland.
  

    [11]
   

  Winston-Salem was the eighth-largest port of entry in the United States by 1916.
  

    [11]
   


  In 1917, the company bought 84 acres (340,000 m
  
   2
  
  ) of property in Winston-Salem and built 180 houses that it sold at cost to workers, to form a development called "Reynoldstown."
  

    [11]
   

  By the time
  
   R.J. Reynolds
  
  died in 1918, his company owned 121 buildings in Winston-Salem.
  

    [11]
   


  In 1920, with a population of 48,395, Winston-Salem was the largest city in
  
   North Carolina
  
  and the largest city between
  
   Atlanta
  
  and
  
   Washington, DC
  
  .
  

    [12]
   



    [13]
   



    [14]
   


  In 1929, the
  
   Reynolds Building
  
  was completed in Winston-Salem. Designed by
  
   William F. Lamb
  
  from the architectural firm
  
   Shreve, Lamb and Harmon
  
  , the Reynolds Building is a 314 feet (96 m) skyscraper that has 21 floors.
  

    [15]
   



    [16]
   

  When completed as the headquarters of R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, it was the tallest building in the United States south of
  
   Baltimore, Maryland
  
  , and it was named the best building of the year by the American Institute of Architects.
  

    [17]
   

  The building is well known for being the predecessor and prototype for the much larger
  
   Empire State Building
  
  that was built in 1931 in New York City.
  

    [18]
   

  Every year the staff of the Empire State Building sends a Father's Day card to the staff at the Reynolds Building in Winston-Salem to pay homage to its role as predecessor to the Empire State Building.
  

    [19]
   


  The governing body for the City of Winston-Salem is an eight-member City Council. Voters go to the polls every four years in November to elect the Mayor and Council. The Mayor is elected at large and council members are elected by citizens in each of the eight wards within the city. The City Council is responsible for adopting and providing for all ordinances, rules and regulations as necessary for the general welfare of the city. It approves the city budget and sets property taxes and user fees. The Council appoints the City Manager and City Attorney and approves appointments to city boards and commissions.
 
  As of 2015, the mayor of Winston-Salem is Allen Joines (D), who was first elected in 2001 and is longest-serving mayor in the history of the city. The members of the City Council are Denise Adams (North Ward), Mayor Pro Tempore Vivian Burke (Northeast Ward), Derwin Montgomery (East Ward), James Taylor, Jr. (Southeast Ward), Molly Leight (South Ward), Dan Besse (Southwest Ward), Robert Clark (West Ward), Jeff MacIntosh (Northwest Ward).
 
  City officials appointed by the City Council include City Attorney Angela Carmon and City Manager Lee Garrity.
  

    [23]
   


  Winston-Salem is in the northwest
  
   Piedmont
  
  area of North Carolina, situated 65 miles (105 km) northwest of the geographic center of the state. According to the
  
   United States Census Bureau
  
  , the city has a total area of 133.7 square miles (346.3 km
  
   2
  
  ), of which 132.4 square miles (343.0 km
  
   2
  
  ) is land and 1.2 square miles (3.2 km
  
   2
  
  ), or 0.93%, is water.
  

    [24]
   


  Less than 30 miles (48 km) north of Winston-Salem are the remains of the ancient
  
   Sauratown Mountains
  
  , named for the Saura people who lived in much of the Piedmont area, including where is now Winston-Salem.
 
  The nearest major cities are
  
   Greensboro
  
  , 30 miles (48 km) to the east, and
  
   High Point
  
  20 miles (32 km) to the southeast.
 
  The city of Winston-Salem has a
  
   humid subtropical climate
  
  characterized by cool, sometimes moderately cold winters, and hot, humid summers. The
  
   Köppen Climate Classification
  
  subtype for this climate is
  
   Cfa
  
  .
  

    [25]
   

  The average high temperatures range from 51 °F (11 °C) in the winter to around 89 °F (32 °C) in the summer. The average low temperatures range from 28 °F (−2 °C) in the winter to around 67 °F (19 °C) in the summer.
  

    [26]
   


  Winston-Salem's population grew by 23.6% from 2000 to 2010,
  

    [31]
   

  making it the fourth largest city in North Carolina. As of the
  
   census
  
  of 2010,
  

    [32]
   

  the population is 229,617, with 90,245 households and a
  
   population density
  
  of 1,733.6 people per square mile.
 
  Winston-Salem is 53.0% female, and 27.8% of its firms are owned by women. The median age is 35 years. 24.6% of the population is under 18 years old, and 12.5% of the population is 65 years or older.
  

    [31]
   


  The racial composition of the city in 2010 was 51.2%
  
   White
  
  , 34.7%
  
   Black
  
  or
  
   African American
  
  , 2%
  
   Asian American
  
  , 0.1%
  
   Native American
  
  , 0.08% Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific native alone,
  

    [31]
   

  and 2.4%
  
   two or more races
  
  . In addition, 14.7% was
  
   Hispanic
  
  or
  
   Latino
  
  , of any race.
  
   Non-Hispanic Whites
  
  were 47.1% of the population in 2010.
  

    [31]
   


  38.4% are married couples living together, 17.3% have a female householder with no husband present, and 39.7% are non-families. 33.1% of all households are made up of individuals and 10.3% have someone living alone who is 65 years of age or older. The average household size is 2.38 and the average family size is 3.06.
  

    [31]
   


  The median income for a household in the city is $41,228, and the median income for a family is $53,222. The mean income for a household in the city is $60,637, and the mean income for a family is $74,938. Males have a median income of $41,064 versus $33,683 for females. The
  
   per capita income
  
  for the city is $24,728. 20.6% of the population and 15.7% of all families are below the
  
   poverty line
  
  . 26.2% of Out of the total population, 31.6% of those under the age of 18 and 8.2% of those 65 and older are living below the poverty line.
  

    [33]
   


  Winston-Salem is the most religious city in North Carolina, with 54.14% of the population being religiously affiliated. Christianity is the largest religion, with
  
   Baptists
  
  (15.77%) making up the largest religious group, followed by
  
   Methodists
  
  (12.79%) and
  
   Catholics
  
  (4.39%).
  
   Pentecostals
  
  (2.97%),
  
   Presbyterians
  
  (2.59%),
  
   Lutherans
  
  (0.96%),
  
   Mormons
  
  (0.90%) make up a significant amount of the Christian population as well. The remaining Christian population (11.93%) is affiliated with other churches such as the
  
   Moravians
  
  and the
  
   United Church of Christ
  
  .
  
   Islam
  
  (0.43%) is the second largest religion after Christianity, followed by
  
   Judaism
  
  (0.20%).
  
   Eastern religions
  
  (0.02%) make up the religious minority.
  

    [34]
   


  The city's long history with the Moravian church has had a lasting cultural effect. The Moravian star is used as the city's official Christmas street decoration. In addition, a 31-foot Moravian star, one of the largest in the world, sits atop the North Tower of
  
   Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center
  
  during the Advent and Christmas seasons.
  

    [35]
   

  Another star sits under
  
   Wake Forest University
  
  's Wait Chapel during the Advent and Christmas seasons as well. Also, Moravian star images decorate the lobby of the city's landmark Reynolds Building.
 
  It is the location of the corporate headquarters of
  
   BB&T
  
  (Branch Banking and Trust Company),
  
   HanesBrands
  
  , Inc.,
  
   Krispy Kreme Doughnuts
  
  , Inc.,
  
   Lowes Foods
  
  Stores,
  
   ISP Sports
  
  ,
  
   Reynolds American
  
  (parent of
  
   R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
  
  ), Reynolda Manufacturing Solutions,
  
   K&W Cafeterias
  
  ,
  

    [36]
   



    [37]
   

  and
  
   TW Garner Food Company
  
  (makers of
  
   Texas Pete
  
  ).
  

    [38]
   


   Blue Rhino
  
  , the nation's largest propane exchange company and a division of
  
   Ferrellgas
  
  , is also headquartered in Winston-Salem.
  
   Wachovia
  
  Corporation was based in Winston-Salem until it merged with
  
   First Union
  
  Corporation in September 2001; the corporate headquarters of the combined company was located in Charlotte, until it was purchased by Wells Fargo in December 2008.
  
   PepsiCo
  
  has its Customer Service Center located in Winston-Salem.
 
  Although traditionally associated with the textile and tobacco industries, Winston-Salem is transforming itself to be a leader in the
  
   nanotech
  
  , high-tech and bio-tech fields. Medical research is a fast-growing local industry, and
  
   Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center
  
  is the largest employer in Winston-Salem. In December 2004, the city landed a deal with
  
   Dell
  
  , Inc. providing millions of dollars in incentives to build a computer assembly plant nearby in southeastern Forsyth County. However Dell closed its Winston-Salem facility in January 2010 due to the poor economy. A portion of downtown Winston-Salem has been designated as the
  
   Wake Forest Innovation Quarter
  
  for biomedical and information technology research and development.
 
  According to the Winston-Salem Business Inc.'s 2012–2013 data report on major employers,
  

    [39]
   

  the ten largest employers in the city are:
 
  According to the Winston-Salem Business Inc.'s 2012 data report on major industries,
  

    [40]
   

  the major industries in Winston-Salem/Forsyth County are by percentage:
 
  Winston-Salem is often referred to as the "City of the Arts",
  

    [44]
   

  partly because it created the first
  
   arts council
  
  in the United States, founded in 1949, and because of the local art schools and attractions. These include the
  
   University of North Carolina School of the Arts
  
  , Twin City Stage, Winston-Salem Theatre Alliance, the Piedmont Opera Theater, the Winston-Salem Symphony, the
  
   Stevens Center
  
  for the Performing Arts, the Milton Rhodes Center for the Arts, the Hanesbrands Theater, and the Sawtooth Center for Visual Arts.
 
  The city's Arts District is centered around Sixth and Trade Streets, where there are many galleries and workshops; nearby is also the ARTivity on the Green art park, established by Art for Art's Sake.
 
  It is also home to the
  
   Southeastern Center for Contemporary Art
  
  (SECCA), a nationally known art center, as well as the
  
   Reynolda House Museum of American Art
  
  (the restored 1917 mansion built by the founder of the
  
   R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company
  


    [45]
   

  and now affiliated with
  
   Wake Forest University
  
  ), displays a premiere collection of American art.
 
  The city plays host to the
  
   National Black Theatre Festival
  
  , the
  
   RiverRun International Film Festival
  
  and the Reynolda Film Festival.
 
  Winston-Salem is also the home of the
  
   Art-o-mat
  
  and houses nine of them throughout the city.
 
  The city is also home to Carolina Music Ways, a grassroots arts organization focusing on the area's diverse, interconnected music traditions, including
  
   bluegrass
  
  , blues, jazz, gospel, old-time stringband, and Moravian music.
 
  Once a year the city is also the home of the
  
   Heavy Rebel Weekender
  
  music festival, featuring over 70 bands, primarily rockabilly, punk and honky tonk, over three days.
 
  Winston-Salem is home to
  
   Hanes Mall
  
  , one of the largest
  
   shopping malls
  
  in
  
   North Carolina
  
  . The area surrounding the mall along Stratford Road and Hanes Mall Boulevard has become the city's largest shopping district.
 
  Other shopping areas exist in the city, including Thruway Shopping Center, the city's first shopping center, Hanes Point Shopping Center, Hanes Commons, Pavilions, Stone's Throw Plaza, Silas Creek Crossing, and the
  
   Marketplace Mall
  
  .
 
  The
  
   Winston-Salem Dash
  
  is a Class A Minor-League baseball team currently affiliated with the
  
   Chicago White Sox
  
  . After 52 years at historic
  
   Ernie Shore Field
  
  , the Dash now plays its home games at the new
  
   BB&T Ballpark
  
  , which opened in 2010. Previous names for the team include the Winston-Salem Cardinals, Twins, Red Sox, Spirits and, most recently, the Winston-Salem Warthogs.
  

    [46]
   

  Its players have included
  
   Vinegar Bend Mizell
  
  ,
  
   Earl Weaver
  
  ,
  
   Bobby Tiefenauer
  
  ,
  
   Harvey Haddix
  
  ,
  
   Stu Miller
  
  ,
  
   Ray Jablonski
  
  ,
  
   Don Blasingame
  
  ,
  
   Gene Oliver
  
  ,
  
   Rico Petrocelli
  
  ,
  
   Jim Lonborg
  
  ,
  
   George Scott
  
  ,
  
   Sparky Lyle
  
  ,
  
   Bill "Spaceman" Lee
  
  ,
  
   Dwight Evans
  
  ,
  
   Cecil Cooper
  
  ,
  
   Butch Hobson
  
  ,
  
   Wade Boggs
  
  ,
  
   Carlos Lee
  
  ,
  
   Joe Crede
  
  ,
  
   Jon Garland
  
  , and
  
   Aaron Rowand
  
  , all of whom have played extensively at the major league level.
 
  The
  
   Carolina Thunderbirds
  
  minor league hockey team will begin play in 2017 at the
  
   LJVM Coliseum Annex
  
  in Winston-Salem.
 

   Wake Forest University
  
  is an original member of the
  
   Atlantic Coast Conference
  
  (ACC).
  
   Wake Forest's football team
  
  plays its games at
  
   BB&T Field
  
  (formerly Groves Stadium), which seats 32,500.
  
   Wake Forest's soccer program
  
  made four consecutive final four appearances (2006–2009) and were NCAA champions in 2007.
 
  The
  
   Lawrence Joel Veterans Memorial Coliseum
  
  is home to
  
   Wake Forest
  
  and some
  
   Winston-Salem State
  
  basketball games.
  
   NASCAR
  

   Whelen All-American Series
  
  racing takes place from March until August at
  
   Bowman Gray Stadium
  
  . The
  
   K&N Pro Series East
  
  also races here. It is NASCAR's longest running racing series, dating to the 1940s. In the fall, the stadium is used for Winston-Salem State Rams football games.
 
  Winston-Salem hosts an
  
   ATP tennis tournament
  
  every year.
 

   Winston-Salem/Forsyth County Schools
  
  has most of its schools inside Winston-Salem. WS/FC Schools include 51 elementary schools, 25 middle schools and 13 high schools.
 
  Private and parochial schools also make up a significant portion of Winston-Salem's educational establishment.
 
  Winston-Salem has a number of colleges and universities, including:
 
  The
  

    Winston-Salem Journal
   

  is the main daily newspaper in Winston-Salem.
  

    Yes! Weekly
   

  is a free weekly paper covering news, opinion, arts, entertainment, music, movies and food.
  
   Triad City Beat
  
  is a free weekly paper in the Triad area that covers Winston-Salem.
  

    [48]
   

  The
  

    Winston-Salem Chronicle
   

  is a weekly newspaper that focuses on the
  
   African-American
  
  community.
  

    [49]
   


  These
  
   radio stations
  
  are located in Winston-Salem, and are listed by call letters, station number, and name. Many more radio stations can be picked up in Winston-Salem that are not located in Winston-Salem.
 
  Winston-Salem makes up part of the Greensboro/Winston-Salem/High Point television
  
   designated market area
  
  . These stations are listed by call letters, channel number, network and city of license.
 
  Cable-Only
 
  The
  
   Winston-Salem Transit Authority
  
  (WSTA) has the responsibility of providing public transportation. It took over from the Safe Bus Company, founded in the 1920s as the largest black owned transportation company in the United States, in 1972. Operating out of the Clark Campbell Transportation Center at 100 West Fifth Street, WSTA has 26 daily routes, which run between 5:30am and 12:00 midnight Monday through Friday and from 6:30am through 6:30pm on Saturday. WSTA makes nearly 3 million passenger trips annually. In February 2010 WSTA added 10 diesel-electric buses to its fleet.
 
  The Piedmont Authority for Regional Transportation (PART) operates a daily schedule from the Campbell center connecting Winston-Salem to Boone, Mt. Airy and Greensboro, where other systems provide in-state routes to points east.
 
  Greyhound lines also provides interstate transportation from the Campbell Center.
 

   US 52
  
  (which runs
  
   concurrent
  
  with
  
   NC 8
  
  ) is the predominant north-south freeway through Winston-Salem; it passes near the heart of downtown.
  
   Business 40
  
  is the main east-west freeway through downtown Winston-Salem and was the main east-west route through the city until 1993, when a bypass loop of
  
   I-40
  
  was built.
  
   I-74
  
  links Winston-Salem to
  
   High Point
  
  (southeast) and
  
   US 311
  
  follows I-40 and US 52 through the Winston-Salem business district.
  
   US 421
  
  , which shares Business 40 through downtown, splits in the western part of the city onto its own freeway west (signed north) toward
  
   Wilkesboro, North Carolina
  
  and
  
   Boone, North Carolina
  
  .
 
  The Winston-Salem Northern Beltway is a proposed freeway that will loop around the city to the north, providing a route for the Future
  
   I-74
  
  on the eastern section and the Future Auxiliary Route
  
   I-274
  
  on the western section. The NCDOT plans for this project to begin after 2010.
 
  By 2014, US 52 south of I-40 will be signed as Spur Route
  
   I-285
  
  . The Winston-Salem Department of Transportation also plans for the US 311 freeway to be extended north along the east side of the city to
  
   Business I-40
  
  by 2030, according to the Long Range Plan.
 
  Major thoroughfares in Winston-Salem include
  
   NC 67
  
  (Silas Creek Parkway & Reynolda Road),
  
   NC 150
  
  (Peters Creek Parkway),
  
   US 158
  
  (Stratford Road), University Parkway, Martin Luther King Jr. Drive, North Point Boulevard, and Hanes Mall Boulevard.
 
  Winston-Salem is served by
  
   Greensboro
  
  's
  
   Piedmont Triad International Airport
  
  . The airport also serves much of the surrounding
  
   Piedmont Triad
  
  area, including
  
   High Point, North Carolina
  
  .
 
  A smaller airport, known as
  
   Smith Reynolds Airport
  
  , is located within the city limits, just northeast of downtown. It is mainly used for
  
   general aviation
  
  and charter flights. Every year, Smith Reynolds Airport hosts an air show for the general public. The Smith Reynolds Airport is home to the Winston-Salem
  
   Civil Air Patrol
  
  Composite Squadron, also known as NC-082. The Civil Air Patrol is a non-profit volunteer organization.
 

   Amtrak
  
  runs a
  
   thruway motorcoach
  
  , twice daily in each direction, between Winston-Salem and the Amtrak station in nearby
  
   High Point
  
  . Buses depart from the Winston-Salem Transportation Center, then stop on the university campus before traveling to High Point. From the High Point station, riders can board the
  
   Crescent line
  
  or the
  
   Carolinian and Piedmont lines
  
  . These lines run directly to local North Carolina destinations as well as cities across the Southeast, as far west as
  
   New Orleans
  
  and as far north as New York City.
 
  Winston-Salem has five
  
   sister cities
  
  , as designated by
  
   Sister Cities International
  
  :
  

    [51]
   



    [52]
   

