

     4 in (100 mm) diagonal widescreen display with Multi-Touch IPS technology 4k pixel resolution at 326 ppi 800:1 contrast ratio (typical) 500 cd/m2 max brightness (typical)
    
  The sixth-generation
  
   iPod Touch
  
  (stylized and marketed as the
  
   iPod touch
  
  , and colloquially known as the
  
   iPod Touch 6G
  
  ,
  
   iPod Touch 6
  
  , or
  
   iPod Touch (2015)
  


    [3]
   

  ) is a multipurpose
  
   pocket computer
  
  designed and marketed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  with a
  
   touchscreen-based
  

   user interface
  
  . It is the successor to the
  
   iPod Touch (5th generation)
  
  , becoming the first major update to the iPod lineup in more than two and a half years. It was released on the
  
   online Apple Store
  
  on July 15, 2015, along with a new
  
   iPod Nano
  
  and
  
   iPod Shuffle
  
  , which received minor upgrades.
  

    [4]
   



    [5]
   


  The iPod Touch is the only iOS device currently produced by Apple that does not implement
  
   Touch ID
  
  , following the discontinuation of the
  
   iPad Mini 2
  
  on March 21, 2017.
 


  The sixth-generation iPod Touch features iOS, Apple's
  
   mobile operating system
  
  . The
  
   user interface
  
  of iOS is based on the concept of
  
   direct manipulation
  
  , using
  
   multi-touch gestures
  
  . Interface control elements consist of sliders, switches, and buttons. Interaction with the OS includes gestures such as
  
   swipe
  
  ,
  
   tap
  
  ,
  
   pinch
  
  , and
  
   reverse pinch
  
  , all of which have specific definitions within the context of the iOS operating system and its multi-touch interface. Internal
  
   accelerometers
  
  are used by some applications to respond to shaking the device (one common result is the undo command) or rotating it vertically (one common result is switching from portrait to landscape mode).
 
  First shipped with iOS 8.4, which was released on June 30, 2015 along with
  
   Apple Music
  
  , it can play music, movies, television shows, audiobooks, and
  
   podcasts
  
  and can sort its media library by songs, artists, albums, videos,
  
   playlists
  
  ,
  
   genres
  
  , composers, podcasts, audiobooks, and
  
   compilations
  
  . Scrolling is achieved by swiping a finger across the screen. Alternatively, headset controls can be used to pause, play, skip, and repeat tracks. However, the
  
   EarPods
  
  that come with the sixth-generation iPod touch do not not include a remote or microphone. The Voice Control feature can also be used to identify a track, play songs in a playlist or by a specific artist, or create a
  
   Genius playlist
  
  .
 
  The sixth-generation iPod Touch supports
  
   iOS 9
  
  that was released in September 2015 and
  
   iOS 10
  
  that was released in September 2016. The latest version of iOS that the sixth-generation iPod touch supports is
  
   iOS 10.2.1
  
  , released January 23, 2017.
 
  The sixth-generation iPod Touch features the new
  
   Apple A8
  
  and
  
   Apple M8
  
  motion co-processor chipset with
  
   64-bit architecture
  
  which is similar to the chipset on the
  
   iPhone 6
  
  and
  
   iPhone 6 Plus
  
  , but it is slightly underclocked at 1.1 GHz (the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus are clocked at 1.4 GHz). It has 1GB of
  
   LPDDR3
  
  RAM, twice the amount as the previous generation iPod Touch.
  

    [6]
   

  Apple's
  
   Metal
  
  graphics technology is also compatible with the iPod Touch 6th generation. The iPod Touch features an 8MP rear iSight camera with video which can record in 1080p at 30fps, or 120fps in slow-motion mode that records at 720p. The camera also supports a burst mode and has an LED flash. Unlike the 5th-generation version,
  

    [7]
   

  the rear camera on the 6th-generation iPod Touch lacks a sapphire crystal lens.
  

    [8]
   

  The front camera is unchanged from the previous generation, a 1.2MP sensor and can record video up to 720p. It is the first iPod Touch that is available with 128 GB of storage, partially filling the void left behind by the
  
   iPod Classic
  
  which offered 160 GB of storage at the time it was discontinued.
 
  The sixth-generation iPod Touch maintains an identical exterior design to the previous generation iPod Touch, with the exception of the iPod Touch Loop button. It is available in silver, gold, space gray, pink, blue, and a
  
   Product Red
  
  version, although each color's shade is slightly different than the previous generation.
  

    [9]
   


  The sixth-generation iPod touch comes with a Lightning Charging cable. This model also comes with the
  
   EarPods
  
  without Remote and Mic. This iPod Touch is compatible with Apple $159 wireless
  
   AirPods
  
  which were released in late December 2016. The
  
   AirPods
  
  were introduced on September 7 at the
  
   Apple Special Event (September 7, 2016)
  
  .
 