


   Silicon
  
  is a
  
   chemical element
  
  with symbol
  
   Si
  
  and
  
   atomic number
  
  14. A hard and brittle crystalline solid with a blue-gray metallic luster, it is a
  
   tetravalent
  

   metalloid
  
  . It is a member of
  
   group 14
  
  in the periodic table, along with
  
   carbon
  
  above it and germanium,
  
   tin
  
  ,
  
   lead
  
  , and
  
   flerovium
  
  below. It is not very reactive, although more reactive than germanium, and has great chemical affinity for oxygen; it was first purified and characterized in 1823 by
  
   Jöns Jakob Berzelius
  
  .
 
  Silicon is the eighth most
  
   common element
  
  in the universe by mass, but very rarely occurs as the pure element in the Earth's crust. It is most widely distributed in
  
   dusts
  
  ,
  
   sands
  
  ,
  
   planetoids
  
  , and
  
   planets
  
  as various forms of
  
   silicon dioxide
  
  (silica) or
  
   silicates
  
  . Over 90% of the Earth's crust is composed of
  
   silicate minerals
  
  , making silicon the
  
   second most abundant element
  
  in the Earth's crust (about 28% by mass) after
  
   oxygen
  
  .
  

    [9]
   


  Most silicon is used commercially without being separated, and often with little processing of the natural minerals. Such use includes industrial construction with
  
   clays
  
  ,
  
   silica sand
  
  , and
  
   stone
  
  . Silicate is used in
  
   Portland cement
  
  for
  
   mortar
  
  and
  
   stucco
  
  , and mixed with silica sand and
  
   gravel
  
  to make
  
   concrete
  
  for walkways, foundations, and roads. Silicates are used in whiteware
  
   ceramics
  
  such as
  
   porcelain
  
  , and in traditional
  
   quartz
  
  -based
  
   soda-lime glass
  
  and many other specialty
  
   glasses
  
  . Silicon compounds such as
  
   silicon carbide
  
  are used as abrasives and components of high-strength ceramics.
 
  Elemental silicon also has a large impact on the modern world economy. Most free silicon is used in the
  
   steel
  
  refining,
  
   aluminium
  
  -casting, and fine chemical industries (often to make
  
   fumed silica
  
  ). Even more visibly, the relatively small portion of very highly purified silicon used in semiconductor electronics (< 10%) is essential to
  
   integrated circuits
  
  — most computers, cell phones, and modern technology depend on it. Silicon is the basis of the widely used synthetic polymers called
  
   silicones
  
  .
 
  Silicon is an essential element in biology, although only tiny traces are required by animals.
  

    [10]
   

  However, various
  
   sea sponges
  
  and microorganisms, such as
  
   diatoms
  
  and
  
   radiolaria
  
  , secrete skeletal structures made of silica. Silica is deposited in many plant tissues, such as in the bark and wood of
  

    Chrysobalanaceae
   

  and the silica cells and silicified
  
   trichomes
  
  of
  

    Cannabis sativa
   

  ,
  
   horsetails
  
  and many
  
   grasses
  
  .
  

    [11]
   




  Silicon is a solid at
  
   room temperature
  
  , with a melting point of 1,414 °C (2,577 °F) and a boiling point of 3,265 °C (5,909 °F). Like water, it has a greater
  
   density
  
  in a
  
   liquid state
  
  than in a
  
   solid state
  
  and it expands when it freezes, unlike most other substances. With a relatively high
  
   thermal conductivity
  
  of 149 W·m
  
   −1
  
  ·K
  
   −1
  
  , silicon conducts heat well.
 
  In its
  
   crystalline
  
  form, pure silicon has a gray color and a
  
   metallic
  
  luster. Like
  
   germanium
  
  , silicon is rather strong,
  
   [
   


      vague
     


   ]
  
  very brittle, and prone to chipping. Silicon, like carbon and germanium, crystallizes in a
  
   diamond cubic
  

   crystal structure
  
  with a lattice spacing of 0.5430710 nm (5.430710
  
   Å
  
  ).
  

    [12]
   


  The outer
  
   electron orbital
  
  of silicon, like that of carbon, has four valence electrons. The 1
  
   s
  
  , 2
  
   s
  
  , 2
  
   p
  
  and 3
  
   s
  
  subshells are completely filled while the 3
  
   p
  
  subshell contains two electrons out of a possible six.
 
  Silicon is a
  
   semiconductor
  
  . It has a negative temperature coefficient of
  
   resistance
  
  , since the number of free charge carriers increases with temperature. The electrical resistance of
  
   single crystal
  
  silicon significantly changes under the application of mechanical stress due to the
  
   piezoresistive effect
  
  .
  

    [13]
   

  Heavily boron-doped silicon is a
  
   type II superconductor
  
  with a transition temperature T
  
   c
  
  of 0.4 K.
  

    [14]
   


  Silicon is a
  
   metalloid
  
  , readily donating or sharing its four outer electrons, and it typically forms four bonds. Like carbon, its four bonding electrons enable it to combine with many other elements or compounds to form a wide range of compounds. Unlike carbon, it can accept additional electrons and form five or six bonds in a sometimes more
  
   labile
  

   silicate
  
  form. Tetra-valent silicon is relatively
  
   inert
  
  ; it reacts with
  
   halogens
  
  and dilute
  
   alkalis
  
  , but most acids (except some hyper-reactive combinations of
  
   nitric acid
  
  and
  
   hydrofluoric acid
  
  ) have no effect on it.
 
  Naturally occurring silicon is composed of three stable
  
   isotopes
  
  ,
  
   28
  
  Si (92.23%),
  
   29
  
  Si (4.67%), and
  
   30
  
  Si (3.10%), with
  
   28
  
  Si being the most abundant.
  

    [15]
   

  Out of these, only
  
   29
  
  Si is of use in
  
   NMR
  
  and
  
   EPR spectroscopy
  
  ,
  

    [16]
   

  as it is the only one with a nuclear spin (
  
   I
  
  =
  

    1
   

    /
   

    2
   

  ).
  

    [17]
   


  Twenty
  
   radioisotopes
  
  have been characterized, with the most stable being
  
   32
  
  Si with a
  
   half-life
  
  of 170 years, and
  
   31
  
  Si with a half-life of 157.3 minutes.
  

    [15]
   

  All of the remaining
  
   radioactive
  
  isotopes have half-lives that are less than seven seconds, and the majority of these have half-lives that are less than one tenth of a second.
  

    [15]
   

  Silicon does not have any known
  
   nuclear isomers
  
  .
  

    [15]
   


   32
  
  Si undergoes low-energy
  
   beta decay
  
  to
  

    32
   
   P
  
  and then stable
  
   32
  

   S
  
  .
  
   31
  
  Si may be produced by the
  
   neutron activation
  
  of natural silicon and is thus useful for quantitative analysis.
  

    [17]
   


  The isotopes of silicon range in
  
   mass number
  
  from 22 to 44.
  

    [15]
   

  The most common
  
   decay mode
  
  of the isotopes with mass numbers lower than the three stable isotopes is
  
   inverse beta decay
  
  , primarily forming aluminium isotopes (13 protons) as
  
   decay products
  
  .
  

    [15]
   

  The most common decay mode for the heavier unstable isotopes is beta decay, primarily forming phosphorus isotopes (15 protons) as decay products.
  

    [15]
   


  In 1787
  
   Antoine Lavoisier
  
  suspected that silica may be an oxide of a fundamental
  
   chemical element
  
  .
  

    [18]
   

  After an attempt to isolate silicon in 1808,
  
   Sir Humphry Davy
  
  proposed the name "silicium" for silicon, from the Latin
  
   silex
  
  ,
  
   silicis
  
  for flint, and adding the "-ium" ending because he believed it was a metal.
  

    [19]
   

  In 1811,
  
   Gay-Lussac
  
  and
  
   Thénard
  
  are thought to have prepared impure
  
   amorphous silicon
  
  , through the heating of recently isolated
  
   potassium
  
  metal with
  
   silicon tetrafluoride
  
  , but they did not purify and characterize the product, nor identify it as a new element.
  

    [20]
   

  Silicon was given its present name in 1817 by Scottish chemist
  
   Thomas Thomson
  
  . He retained part of Davy's name but added "-on" because he believed that silicon was a
  
   nonmetal
  
  similar to
  
   boron
  
  and
  
   carbon
  
  .
  

    [21]
   

  In 1823,
  
   Berzelius
  
  prepared amorphous silicon using approximately the same method as Gay-Lussac (potassium metal and potassium fluorosilicate), but purifying the product to a brown powder by repeatedly washing it.
  

    [22]
   

  As a result, he is usually given credit for the element's discovery.
  

    [23]
   



    [24]
   


  Silicon in its more common crystalline form was not prepared until 31 years later, by
  
   Deville
  
  .
  

    [25]
   



    [26]
   

  By
  
   electrolyzing
  
  a mixture of
  
   sodium chloride
  
  and
  
   aluminium chloride
  
  containing approximately 10% silicon, he was able to obtain a slightly impure
  
   allotrope
  
  of silicon in 1854.
  

    [27]
   

  Later, more cost-effective methods have been developed to isolate several
  
   allotrope
  
  forms, the most recent being
  
   silicene
  
  .
 
  Because silicon is an important element in high-technology semiconductor devices, many places in the world bear its name. For example,
  
   Santa Clara Valley
  
  in
  
   California
  
  acquired the nickname
  
   Silicon Valley
  
  since the element is the base material used in the semiconductor industry located there. Other locations have been nicknamed for similar reasons, including
  
   Silicon Forest
  
  in
  
   Oregon
  
  ,
  
   Silicon Hills
  
  in
  
   Austin, Texas
  
  ,
  
   Silicon Slopes
  
  in
  
   Salt Lake City, Utah
  
  ,
  
   Silicon Saxony
  
  in
  
   Germany
  
  ,
  
   Silicon Valley
  
  in
  
   India
  
  ,
  
   Silicon Border
  
  in
  
   Mexicali, Mexico
  
  ,
  
   Silicon Fen
  
  in
  
   Cambridge, England
  
  ,
  
   Silicon Roundabout
  
  in
  
   London
  
  ,
  
   Silicon Glen
  
  in
  
   Scotland
  
  , and
  
   Silicon Gorge
  
  in
  
   Bristol, England
  
  .
 
  Measured by mass, silicon makes up 27.7% of the
  
   Earth's crust
  
  and is the second most abundant element in the crust, with only oxygen having a greater abundance.
  

    [28]
   

  Silicon is usually found in the form of complex
  
   silicate minerals
  
  , and less often as
  
   silicon dioxide
  
  (
  
   silica
  
  , a major component of common sand). Pure silicon crystals are very rarely found in nature, but notable exceptions are crystals as large as to 0.3 mm across found during sampling gasses from
  
   Kudriavy
  
  volcano on the Kamchatka Peninsula.
  

    [29]
   



    [30]
   


  The
  
   silicate minerals
  
  —various minerals containing silicon, oxygen and reactive metals—account for 90% of the mass of the Earth's crust. In the high temperatures prevalent in the formation of the inner solar system, silicon and oxygen readily combine, forming
  
   network solids
  
  of silicon and oxygen in compounds of low volatility. Since oxygen and silicon were the most common
  
   metals
  
  (using the astrochemical definition as anything other than hydrogen or helium) in the debris from
  
   supernova
  
  dust which formed the
  
   protoplanetary disk
  
  in the
  
   formation and evolution of the Solar System
  
  , they formed many complex silicates which accreted into larger rocky
  
   planetesimals
  
  that formed the
  
   terrestrial planets
  
  . Here, the reduced silicate mineral matrix entrapped the metals reactive enough to be oxidized (aluminium, calcium, sodium, potassium and magnesium). After loss of volatile gases, as well as carbon and sulfur by reaction with hydrogen, this silicate mixture of elements formed most of the Earth's crust.
 
  These silicates were of relatively lower density than iron, nickel, and other metals non-reactive to oxygen, and a residuum of uncombined metallic iron and nickel sank to the planet's core, leaving a thick
  
   mantle
  
  of mostly of magnesium and iron silicates between core and crust. These are thought to be mostly
  
   silicate perovskites
  
  , followed in abundance by the magnesium/iron oxide
  
   ferropericlase
  
  .
  

    [31]
   


  Examples of silicate minerals in the crust include those in the
  
   pyroxene
  
  ,
  
   amphibole
  
  ,
  
   mica
  
  , and
  
   feldspar
  
  groups. These minerals occur in clay and various types of
  
   rock
  
  such as
  
   granite
  
  and
  
   sandstone
  
  . In the crust, very pure
  
   silica
  
  occurs in different crystalline forms of
  
   quartz
  
  and
  
   opal
  
  . The crystals have the empirical formula of silicon dioxide, but do not consist of discrete silicon dioxide molecules in the manner of solid carbon dioxide. Rather, silica is structurally a network solid consisting of silicon and oxygen in three-dimensional crystals, like diamond. Less pure silica forms the natural glass
  
   obsidian
  
  .
  
   Biogenic silica
  
  occurs in the structure of diatoms,
  
   radiolaria
  
  and
  
   siliceous sponges
  
  .
 
  Silicon is also a principal component of many
  
   meteorites
  
  , and of
  
   tektites
  
  , a mineral of possibly lunar origin, or (if Earth-derived) which has been subjected to unusual temperatures and pressures, possibly from meteorite strike.
 

   Ferrosilicon
  
  , an iron-silicon alloy that contains varying ratios of elemental silicon and iron, accounts for about 80% of the world's production of elemental silicon, with China, the leading supplier of elemental silicon, providing 4.6 million
  
   tonnes
  
  (or 2/3 of the world output) of silicon, most of which is in the form of ferrosilicon. It is followed by Russia (610,000 t), Norway (330,000 t), Brazil (240,000 t) and the United States (170,000 t).
  

    [32]
   

  Ferrosilicon is primarily used by the iron and steel industry (see below) with primary use as alloying addition in iron or steel and for de-oxidation of steel in integrated steel plants.
 
  Aluminium-silicon alloys (called
  
   silumin
  
  alloys) are heavily used in the aluminium alloy casting industry, where silicon is the single most important additive to aluminium to improve its casting properties. Since cast aluminium is widely used in the automobile industry, this use of silicon is thus the single largest industrial use (about 55% of the total) of "metallurgical grade" pure silicon (as this purified silicon is added to pure aluminium, whereas ferrosilicon is never purified before being added to steel).
  

    [33]
   


  Elemental silicon alloyed with significant quantities of other elements, usually up to 5%, is often referred to loosely as
  
   silicon metal
  
  . It makes up about 20% of the world total elemental silicon production, with less than 1 to 2% of total elemental silicon (5–10% of metallurgical grade silicon) ever purified to higher grades for use in electronics. Metallurgical grade silicon is commercially prepared by the reaction of high-purity
  
   silica
  
  with wood, charcoal, and coal in an
  
   electric arc furnace
  
  using carbon
  
   electrodes
  
  . At temperatures over 1,900
  
   °C
  
  (3,450
  
   °F
  
  ), the carbon in the aforementioned materials and the silicon undergo the
  
   chemical reaction
  
  :
 
  Liquid silicon collects in the bottom of the furnace, which is then drained and cooled. The silicon produced in this manner is called
  
   metallurgical grade silicon
  
  and is at least 98% pure. Using this method,
  
   silicon carbide
  
  (SiC) may also form from an excess of carbon in one or both of the following ways:
 
  However, provided the concentration of SiO
  
   2
  
  is kept high, the silicon carbide can be eliminated by the chemical reaction:
 
  As noted above, metallurgical grade silicon "metal" has its primary use in the aluminium casting industry to make aluminium-silicon alloy parts. The remainder (about 45%) is used by the
  
   chemical industry
  
  , where it is primarily employed to make
  
   fumed silica
  
  , with the rest used in production of other fine chemicals such as
  
   silanes
  
  and some types of
  
   silicones
  
  .
  

    [34]
   


  As of September 2008,
  
   metallurgical
  
  grade silicon costs about
  
   US$
  
  1.45 per pound ($3.20/kg),
  

    [35]
   

  up from $0.77 per pound ($1.70/kg) in 2005.
  

    [36]
   


  Today's purification processes involve the conversion of silicon into volatile liquids, such as
  
   trichlorosilane
  
  (HSiCl
  
   3
  
  ) and
  
   silicon tetrachloride
  
  (SiCl
  
   4
  
  ) or into the gaseous
  
   silane
  
  (SiH
  
   4
  
  ). These compounds are then separated by a
  
   distillation
  
  and transformed into high-purity silicon, either by a
  
   redox
  
  reaction or by
  
   thermal decomposition
  
  .
  
   Vapor phase epitaxy
  
  of reducing silicon tetrachloride with hydrogen at approximately 1250 °C was done:
 
  In the late 1950s, the American chemical company
  
   DuPont
  
  patented a method for the production of 99.99% pure silicon, using the metal
  
   zinc
  
  as a
  
   reductant
  
  to transform redistilled silicon tetrachloride into high-purity silicon by a vapor phase reaction at 900 °C. This technique, however, was plagued with practical problems, as the byproduct zinc chloride (ZnCl
  
   2
  
  ) solidified and clogged lines, and was eventually abandoned in favor of more sophisticated processes.
  

    [38]
   


  The best known technique is the so-called
  
   Siemens process
  
  . This technique does not require a reductant such as zinc, as it grows high-purity silicon
  
   crystallites
  
  directly on the surface of (pre-existing) pure silicon seed rods by a
  
   chemical decomposition
  
  that takes place when the gaseous trichlorosilane is blown over the rod's surface at 1150 °C. A common name for this type of technique is
  
   chemical vapor deposition
  
  (CVD) and produces high-purity
  
   polycrystalline silicon
  
  , also known as polysilicon. While the conventional Siemens process produces
  
   electronic grade
  
  polysilicon at typically 9N–11N purities, that is, it contains impurity levels of less than one
  
   part per billion
  
  (ppb), the modified Siemens process is a dedicated process-route for the production of silicon with purities of 6N (99.9999%) and less energy demand.
  

    [39]
   



    [40]
   



    [41]
   


  A more recent alternative for the production of polysilicon is the
  
   fluidized bed reactor
  
  (FBR) manufacturing technology. Compared to the traditional Siemens process, FBR features a number of advantages that lead to cheaper polysilicon demanded by the
  
   fast-growing
  
  photovoltaic industry. Contrary to Siemens' batch process, FBR runs continuously, wasting fewer resources and requires less setup and downtime. It uses about 10 percent of the electricity consumed by a conventional rod reactor in the established Siemens process, as it does not waste energy by placing heated gas and silicon in contact with cold surfaces. In the FBR, silane (SiH
  
   4
  
  ) is injected into the reactor from below and forms a fluidized bed together with the silicon seed particles that are fed from above. The gaseous silane then decomposes and deposits silicon on the seed particles. When the particles have grown to larger granules, they eventually sink to the bottom of the reactor where they are continuously withdrawn from the process.
 
  The FBR manufacturing technology outputs polysilicon at 6N to 9N, a purity still higher than the 5N to 6N of
  
   upgraded metallurgical silicon
  
  (UMG-Si), a third technology used by the photovoltaic industry, that dispenses altogether with chemical purification, using metallurgical techniques instead. Currently most silicon for the photovoltaic market is produced by the Siemens process and only about 10 percent by the FBR technology, while UMG-Si accounts for about 2 percent. By 2020, however, IHS Technology predicts that market shares for FBR technology and UMG-Si will grow to 16.7 and 5.4 percent, respectively.
  

    [42]
   


  The company
  
   REC
  
  is one of the leading producers of silane and polysilicon using FBR technology. The three-step chemical reaction involves (last step occurs inside the FB-reactor):
  
   (1.)
  
  3 SiCl
  
   4
  
  + Si + 2 H
  
   2
  
  → 4 HSiCl
  
   3
  
  , followed by
  
   (2.)
  
  4 HSiCl
  
   3
  
  → 3 SiCl
  
   4
  
  + SiH
  
   4
  
  , and
  
   (3.)
  
  SiH
  
   4
  
  → Si + 2 H
  
   2
  
  .
  

    [43]
   

  Other precursors such as
  
   tribromosilane
  
  had been used by other companies as well.
 
  The use of silicon in
  
   semiconductor
  
  devices demands a much greater purity than afforded by metallurgical grade silicon. Very pure silicon (>99.9%) can be extracted directly from solid silica or other silicon compounds by molten salt electrolysis.
  

    [44]
   



    [45]
   

  This method, known as early as 1854
  

    [46]
   

  (see also
  
   FFC Cambridge process
  
  ), has the potential to directly produce 6N silicon without any
  
   carbon dioxide
  
  emission at much lower energy consumption.
 
  6N silicon cannot be used for
  
   microelectronics
  
  . To properly control the quantum mechanical properties, the purity of the silicon must be very high. Bulk silicon wafers used at the beginning of the integrated circuit making process must first be refined to a purity of 99.9999999% often referred to as "9N" for "9 nines", a process which requires repeated applications of refining technology.
 
  The majority of silicon crystals grown for device production are produced by the
  
   Czochralski process
  
  , (Cz-Si) It was the cheapest method available. However, single crystals grown by the Czochralski process contain impurities because the
  
   crucible
  
  containing the melt often dissolves. Historically, a number of methods have been used to produce ultra-high-purity silicon.
 
  Early silicon purification techniques were based on the fact that if silicon is melted and re-solidified, the last parts of the mass to solidify contain most of the impurities. The earliest method of silicon purification, first described in 1919 and used on a limited basis to make
  
   radar
  
  components during
  
   World War II
  
  , involved crushing metallurgical grade silicon and then partially dissolving the silicon powder in an acid. When crushed, the silicon cracked so that the weaker impurity-rich regions were on the outside of the resulting grains of silicon. As a result, the impurity-rich silicon was the first to be dissolved when treated with acid, leaving behind a more pure product.
 
  In
  
   zone melting
  
  , also called zone refining, the first silicon purification method to be widely used industrially, rods of metallurgical grade silicon are heated to melt at one end. Then, the heater is slowly moved down the length of the rod, keeping a small length of the rod molten as the silicon cools and re-solidifies behind it. Since most impurities tend to remain in the molten region rather than re-solidify, when the process is complete, most of the impurities in the rod will have been moved into the end that was the last to be melted. This end is then cut off and discarded, and the process repeated if a still higher purity is desired.
  

    [47]
   


  People can be exposed to silicon in the workplace by breathing it in, swallowing it, skin contact, and eye contact. The
  
   Occupational Safety and Health Administration
  
  (OSHA) has set the legal limit (
  
   Permissible exposure limit
  
  ) for silicon exposure in the workplace as 15 mg/m
  
   3
  
  total exposure and 5 mg/m
  
   3
  
  respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday. The
  
   National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health
  
  (NIOSH) has set a
  
   Recommended exposure limit
  
  (REL) of 10 mg/m
  
   3
  
  total exposure and 5 mg/m
  
   3
  
  respiratory exposure over an 8-hour workday.
  

    [48]
   



   Building materials.
  
  Most silicon is used industrially without being separated into the element, and indeed often with comparatively little processing from natural occurrence. Over 90% of the Earth's crust is composed of
  
   silicate minerals
  
  , which are compounds of silicon and oxygen, often with metallic ions when negatively charged silicate anions require cations to balance the charge. Many of these have direct commercial uses, such as clays,
  
   silica
  
  sand and most kinds of building stone. Thus, the vast majority of uses for silicon are as structural compounds, either as the silicate minerals or silica (crude silicon dioxide). Silicates are used in making
  
   Portland cement
  
  (made mostly of calcium silicates) which is used in
  
   building mortar
  
  and modern
  
   stucco
  
  , but more importantly, combined with silica sand, and gravel (usually containing silicate minerals like granite), to make the
  
   concrete
  
  that is the basis of most of the very largest industrial building projects of the modern world.
  

    [64]
   



   Ceramics and glass.
  
  Silica is used to make
  
   fire brick
  
  , a type of ceramic. Silicate minerals are also in whiteware
  
   ceramics
  
  , an important class of products usually containing various types of fired
  
   clay
  
  minerals (natural aluminium phyllosilicates). An example is
  
   porcelain
  
  which is based on the silicate mineral
  
   kaolinite
  
  . Traditional
  
   glass
  
  (silica-based
  
   soda-lime glass
  
  ) also functions in many of the same ways, and is also used for windows and containers. In addition, specialty silica based
  
   glass fibers
  
  are used for
  
   optical fiber
  
  , as well as to produce
  
   fiberglass
  
  for structural support and
  
   glass wool
  
  for thermal insulation.
 

   Artificial silicon compounds.
  
  Very occasional elemental silicon is found in nature, and also naturally-occurring compounds of silicon and carbon (
  
   silicon carbide
  
  ) or nitrogen (
  
   silicon nitride
  
  ) are found in stardust samples or meteorites in
  
   presolar grains
  
  , but the oxidizing conditions of the inner planets of the solar system make planetary silicon compounds found there mostly silicates and silica. Free silicon, or compounds of silicon in which the element is covalently attached to hydrogen, boron, or elements other than oxygen, are mostly artificially produced. They are described below.
 
  Silicon compounds of more modern origin function as high-technology abrasives and new high-strength ceramics based upon
  
   silicon carbide
  
  . Silicon is a component of some
  
   superalloys
  
  .
 
  Alternating silicon-oxygen chains with hydrogen attached to the remaining silicon bonds form the ubiquitous silicon-based polymeric materials known as
  
   silicones
  
  . These compounds containing silicon-oxygen and occasionally silicon-carbon bonds have the capability to act as bonding intermediates between glass and organic compounds, and to form polymers with useful properties such as impermeability to water, flexibility and resistance to chemical attack. Silicones are often used in
  
   waterproofing
  
  treatments,
  
   molding
  
  compounds, mold-
  
   release agents
  
  , mechanical seals, high temperature
  
   greases
  
  and waxes, and
  
   caulking
  
  compounds. Silicone is also sometimes used in
  
   breast implants
  
  , contact lenses,
  
   explosives
  
  and
  
   pyrotechnics
  
  .
  

    [65]
   


   Silly Putty
  
  was originally made by adding
  
   boric acid
  
  to
  
   silicone oil
  
  .
  

    [66]
   


  Elemental silicon is added to molten
  
   cast iron
  
  as
  
   ferrosilicon
  
  or silicocalcium alloys to improve performance in casting thin sections and to prevent the formation of
  
   cementite
  
  where exposed to outside air. The presence of elemental silicon in molten iron acts as a sink for oxygen, so that the steel carbon content, which must be kept within narrow limits for each type of steel, can be more closely controlled. Ferrosilicon production and use is a monitor of the steel industry, and although this form of elemental silicon is grossly impure, it accounts for 80% of the world's use of free silicon. Silicon is an important constituent of
  
   electrical steel
  
  , modifying its
  
   resistivity
  
  and
  
   ferromagnetic
  
  properties.
 
  The properties of silicon can be used to modify alloys with metals other than iron. "Metallurgical grade" silicon is silicon of 95–99% purity. About 55% of the world consumption of metallurgical purity silicon goes for production of aluminium-silicon alloys (
  
   silumin
  
  alloys) for aluminium part
  
   casts
  
  , mainly for use in the
  
   automotive industry
  
  . Silicon's importance in aluminium casting is that a significantly high amount (12%) of silicon in aluminium forms a
  
   eutectic mixture
  
  which solidifies with very little thermal contraction. This greatly reduces tearing and cracks formed from stress as casting alloys cool to solidity. Silicon also significantly improves the hardness and thus wear-resistance of aluminium.
  

    [33]
   



    [34]
   


  Most elemental silicon produced remains as a ferrosilicon alloy, and only about 20% is refined to metallurgical grade purity (a total of 1.3–1.5 million metric tons/year). An estimated 15% of the world production of metallurgical grade silicon is further refined to semiconductor purity.
  

    [34]
   

  However, the economic importance of this small very high-purity fraction (especially the ~ 5% which is processed to monocrystalline silicon for integrated circuits) is disproportionately large.
 
  Pure
  
   monocrystalline silicon
  
  is used to produce
  
   silicon wafers
  
  used in the
  
   semiconductor industry
  
  , in electronics, and in some high-cost and high-efficiency
  
   photovoltaic
  
  applications. Pure silicon is an
  
   intrinsic semiconductor
  
  , which means that unlike metals, it conducts
  
   electron holes
  
  and electrons released from atoms by heat; silicon's
  
   electrical conductivity
  
  increases with higher temperatures. Pure silicon has too low a conductivity (i.e., too high a
  
   resistivity
  
  ) to be used as a circuit element in electronics. In practice, pure silicon is
  
   doped
  
  with small concentrations of certain other elements, which greatly increase its conductivity and adjust its electrical response by controlling the number and charge (
  
   positive
  
  or
  
   negative
  
  ) of activated carriers. Such control is necessary for
  
   transistors
  
  ,
  
   solar cells
  
  ,
  
   semiconductor detectors
  
  , and other
  
   semiconductor devices
  
  used in the computer industry and other technical applications. In
  
   silicon photonics
  
  , silicon can be used as a continuous wave
  
   Raman laser
  
  medium to produce coherent light, though it is ineffective as an everyday light source.
 
  In common
  
   integrated circuits
  
  , a wafer of monocrystalline silicon serves as a mechanical support for the circuits, which are created by doping and insulated from each other by thin layers of
  
   silicon oxide
  
  , an insulator that is easily produced by exposing the element to oxygen under the proper conditions. Silicon has become the most popular material for both high power semiconductors and integrated circuits because it can withstand the highest temperatures and greatest electrical activity without suffering
  
   avalanche breakdown
  
  (an
  
   electron avalanche
  
  is created when heat produces free electrons and holes, which in turn pass more current, which produces more heat). In addition, the insulating oxide of silicon is not soluble in water, which gives it an advantage over
  
   germanium
  
  (an element with similar properties which can also be used in semiconductor devices) in certain fabrication techniques.
  

    [67]
   


  Monocrystalline silicon is expensive to produce, and is usually justified only in production of integrated circuits, where tiny crystal imperfections can interfere with tiny circuit paths. For other uses, other types of pure silicon may be employed. These include
  
   hydrogenated amorphous silicon
  
  and upgraded metallurgical-grade silicon (UMG-Si) used in the production of low-cost,
  
   large-area electronics
  
  in applications such as
  
   liquid crystal displays
  
  and of large-area, low-cost, thin-film
  
   solar cells
  
  . Such semiconductor grades of silicon are either slightly less pure or polycrystalline rather than monocrystalline, and are produced in comparable quatities as the monocrystalline silicon: 75,000 to 150,000 metric tons per year. The market for the lesser grade is growing more quickly than for monocrystalline silicon. By 2013, polycrystalline silicon production, used mostly in solar cells, was projected to reach 200,000 metric tons per year, while monocrystalline semiconductor grade silicon was expected to remain less than 50,000 tons/year.
  

    [34]
   


  Since 2000, silicon has found a new use in mechanical watch movements. Several manufacturers of mechanical watch movements have incorporated silicon parts, mainly in the escapements and balance wheel regions. Silicon hair-springs are becoming more common as are silicon escapement wheels and forks. Silicon has several desirable properties when used in these contexts; It is thermally stable, shock resistant, and requires little to no lubrication. Ulysse Nardin pioneered these applications, with Omega, Breguet, Patek, Rolex, Cartier, and Damasko following.
  

    [68]
   

  Most of these parts for watch movements are manufactured by
  
   deep reactive-ion etching
  
  (DRIE).
  

    [69]
   


  Although silicon is readily available in the form of
  
   silicates
  
  , very few organisms use it directly.
  
   Diatoms
  
  ,
  
   radiolaria
  
  and
  
   siliceous sponges
  
  use
  
   biogenic silica
  
  as a structural material for skeletons. In more advanced plants, the silica
  
   phytoliths
  
  (opal phytoliths) are rigid microscopic bodies occurring in the cell; some plants, for example
  
   rice
  
  , need silicon for their growth.
  

    [70]
   



    [71]
   



    [72]
   

  There is some evidence that silicon is important to nail, hair, bone and skin health,
  

    [73]
   

  for example in studies that show that premenopausal women with higher dietary silicon intake have higher
  
   bone density
  
  , and that silicon supplementation can increase bone volume and density in patients with
  
   osteoporosis
  
  .
  

    [74]
   

  Silicon is needed for synthesis of
  
   elastin
  
  and
  
   collagen
  
  , of which the
  
   aorta
  
  contains the greatest quantity in the human body.
  

    [75]
   


  Silicon is currently under consideration for elevation to the status of a "plant beneficial substance by the Association of American Plant Food Control Officials (AAPFCO)."
  

    [76]
   



    [77]
   

  Silicon has been shown in university and field studies to improve plant cell wall strength and structural integrity,
  

    [78]
   

  improve drought and frost resistance, decrease lodging potential, and boost the plant's natural pest and disease fighting systems.
  

    [79]
   

  Silicon has also been shown to improve plant vigor and physiology by improving root mass and density, and increasing above ground plant biomass and crop yields.
  

    [78]
   

