


   Power Macintosh
  
  , later
  
   Power Mac
  
  , is a line of Apple
  
   Macintosh
  

   workstation
  
  -class
  
   personal computers
  
  based on various models of
  
   PowerPC
  

   microprocessors
  
  that were developed, marketed, and supported by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  from March 1994 until August 2006. The first models were the
  
   Power Macintosh 6100
  
  ,
  
   7100
  
  , and
  
   8100
  
  , which offered speeds ranging from 60 to 110
  
   MHz
  
  . These machines replaced Apple's
  
   Quadra
  
  series of personal computers, and were housed in cases very similar to systems sold by Apple up to that point. The Power Mac went on to become the mainstay of Apple's top-end offerings for twelve years, through a succession of case designs, four major generations of PowerPC chips, and a great deal of press coverage, design accolades, and technical controversy. In August 2006, the Power Mac's retirement was announced at Apple's
  
   Worldwide Developers Conference
  
  by
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  and
  
   Phil Schiller
  
  , making way for its Intel-based replacement, the
  
   Mac Pro
  
  .
 




  The following are recent Power Mac lines based on the
  
   New World ROM
  
  .
 

   The
   
    Power Macintosh G3
   
   All-In-One was replaced with the
   
    iMac
   
   series.
  



  The
  
   ROM
  
  and
  
   Mac OS
  

   operating system
  
  released with the new Power Mac machines included a
  
   Mac 68K emulator
  
  to enable programs written for Motorola 68k series CPUs, including nearly all prior Mac software, to run without changes. (A similar scheme is employed to run 68K software on modern x86
  
   Alpha Microsystems
  
  machines.) As the Power Mac was originally intended to be a part of the high end of Apple's product line, for a number of years the company continued to offer less expensive 68k-based computers alongside the more expensive Power Mac lineup. However, for many of these so-called 68K transition Macs, Apple offered an upgrade path in the form of a
  
   PowerPC Macintosh Processor Upgrade Card
  
  and aggressively marketed it to assure a wary consumer of their investment. In April 1996, Apple discontinued the
  
   Macintosh LC 580
  
  (released in 1995), the last remaining desktop model of the 68k-based Macintosh line. The
  
   PowerBook 190cs
  
  , the last 68k-based PowerBook, was discontinued in October 1996. All subsequent Macintosh computers would be based on PowerPC processors until January 2006, when Apple
  
   switched
  
  to
  
   Intel
  
  processors. (In 2005, Apple released an Intel-based Power Mac development system to Apple developers at
  
   WWDC
  
  .)
 
  All Power Macs prior to 1997 used PowerPC 60x-series processors, and 4-digit model numbers (e.g. Power Mac 8600). In 1997 the first third-generation ("G3") Power Macintosh was introduced, using the PowerPC 750 processor. From this model onward, Apple no longer used a numbering scheme to identify their Power Mac models, but instead referred to them by their PowerPC processor generation number (i.e. G3, G4, and G5). Later models based on the same generation of PowerPC processor relied on descriptive characteristics to differentiate them, e.g. the color scheme ("Power Macintosh G3 – Blue and White") or a technical feature of a particular model ("Power Mac G4 – Gigabit Ethernet"). This same identification scheme was used in the
  
   iMac
  
  ,
  
   PowerBook
  
  , and
  
   iBook
  
  lines of Macintosh computers.
 
  The marketing name was changed from
  
   Power Macintosh
  
  to
  
   Power Mac
  
  with the introduction of the G4 models, meaning all G3 and earlier models are referred to as "Power Macintosh", while all G4 and G5 models are "Power Mac's". Not all Apple documentation follows this rule, but the vast majority does.
 
  The
  

    Power Mac
   

  brand name was used for Apple's high-end tower style computers, targeted primarily at businesses and creative professionals, in differentiation to their more compact "iMac" line (intended for home use) and the "eMac" line (for the education markets). They were usually equipped with Apple's newest technologies, and commanded the highest prices among Apple desktop models. Some Power Mac G4 and G5 models were offered in
  
   dual-processor
  
  configurations.
 
  Prior to the
  
   Power Mac
  
  name change, certain
  
   Power Macintosh
  
  models were otherwise identical to their lower-cost re-branded siblings sold as the
  
   Macintosh LC
  
  and
  
   Macintosh Performa
  
  , as well as the dedicated
  
   Apple Workgroup Server
  
  and
  
   Macintosh Server G3 & G4
  
  lines. Other past Macintosh lines which used PowerPC processors include the
  
   PowerBook 5300
  
  and later models,
  
   iMac
  
  ,
  
   iBook
  
  and
  
   Xserve
  
  as well as the
  
   Apple Network Server
  
  , which was not technically a Macintosh.
 
  The Intel-based successor of the Power Mac is the
  
   Mac Pro
  
  , in line with the renaming of Apple's professional notebooks from
  
   PowerBook
  
  to
  
   MacBook Pro
  
  . The successor to the All-In-One Power Macintosh models
  
   (5x00 series)
  
  , the last of which was the
  
   Power Macintosh G3
   
    All-In-One
   

  , was succeeded by the
  
   iMac
  
  , which kicked off Apple's renaissance in the early 21st century and has persisted through the Intel transition to the present.
 
  Apple introduced the Power Mac series of high-end personal computers aimed at businesses and creative professionals in 1994 with an
  
   advertising campaign
  
  consisting of several
  
   television commercials
  
  and print ads. The television commercials used the slogan "
  
   The Future Is Better Than You Expected
  
  ", featuring the first three Power Macintosh computers to showcase special features such as
  
   networking
  
  and
  
   MS-DOS
  
  compatibility.
 

