


   Apple's Intel transition
  
  was the process of changing the
  
   central processing unit
  
  (CPU) of
  
   Macintosh
  

   computers
  
  from
  
   PowerPC
  
  processors to
  
   Intel
  

   x86
  
  processors. The transition became public knowledge at the 2005
  
   Worldwide Developers Conference
  
  (WWDC), when
  
   Apple's
  
  CEO
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  made the announcement that the company would make a transition from the use of PowerPC
  
   microprocessors
  
  supplied by
  
   Freescale
  
  (formerly
  
   Motorola
  
  ) and
  
   IBM
  
  in its Macintosh computers, to processors designed and manufactured by Intel, a chief supplier for most of Apple's competitors.
  

    [1]
   


  The transition marked the Macintosh platform's second migration to a new CPU architecture. The first was the switch from the
  
   Motorola 68000 ("68k") series architecture
  
  (used since the original
  
   Macintosh 128K
  
  ) to the
  
   PowerPC
  
  architecture. Apple is the only personal computer company to have successfully completed such a transition – competitors
  
   Commodore
  
  and
  
   Atari
  
  never regained their market positions after their switch from 6502 to 68k in the mid-1980s
  

    [2]
   



    [3]
   

  and stopped manufacturing computers in the early 1990s, around the time Apple was switching to PowerPC.
 
  Apple's initial press release indicated the transition would begin by June 2006, and finish by the end of 2007, but it actually proceeded much more quickly. The first generation Intel-based Macintoshes were released in January 2006 with
  
   Mac OS X 10.4.4 Tiger
  
  , and Steve Jobs announced the last models to switch in August 2006, with the
  
   Mac Pro
  
  available immediately and with the Intel
  
   Xserve
  
  available by October 2006.
  

    [4]
   

  The Xserve servers were available in December 2006.
  

    [5]
   


  Apple released
  
   Mac OS X v10.6
  
  "Snow Leopard" on August 28, 2009 as Intel-only, removing support for the PowerPC architecture.
  

    [6]
   




  The names of some of Apple's desktop and laptop product lines changed between the PowerPC version and the corresponding Intel version. Most notably, the word "Power" was dropped from all product lines. During the Keynote address at Macworld in 2006, where the first Intel-based Macs, the iMac and MacBook Pro, were announced, Steve Jobs remarked that the new naming schemes for their products reflected their desire to have "Mac" in the name of all of their computers, and because they were "done with power." This was in reference to the fact that the previous PowerPC G5 processors were not energy efficient, and therefore used far too much power to be used in any portable Macs.
 
  The first known attempt to move to Intel platforms was the
  
   Star Trek project
  
  from spring 1992 to 1993, a joint effort with
  
   Novell
  
  to port Mac OS to run on ordinary 486 PCs. It was based on Novell's next in-development version of DR DOS with its pre-emptive multitasker, which provided a hybrid 32-bit/16-bit core system similar in architecture to Windows 3.1 in 386 Enhanced Mode, but without a GUI. The ported System 7.1 ran on top of this environment. While the project was successful with running pre-beta versions it was stopped in 1993 after management and strategy changes. The core system (but without the Star Trek-specific components) was later released as part of Novell DOS 7.
 
  The Macintosh line underwent a similar transition between 1994 and about 1996, when Apple
  
   switched
  
  from Motorola's
  
   68k
  
  series of chips to
  
   IBM
  
  /Motorola
  
   PowerPC
  
  processors, developed jointly by Motorola, Apple, and IBM. This took several years, during which Apple produced versions of the
  
   classic Mac OS
  
  that could run on either platform, introduced fairly low-level emulation of the 68k architecture by the PowerPC models, and encouraged third-party developers to release
  
   fat binaries
  
  that could run natively on either architecture.
 
  Apple later transitioned the Macintosh from the earlier
  
   classic Mac OS
  
  to
  
   Mac OS X
  
  . This transition also took a number of years, and was facilitated by the inclusion of
  
   Classic
  
  , an environment in which an instance of
  
   Mac OS 9
  
  could be run, permitting the execution of programs that had not been ported to Mac OS X, as well as the introduction of
  
   Carbon
  
  for Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X, allowing programs to run natively on either system.
 
  Jobs revealed at the 2005 WWDC, that every version of Mac OS X had been secretly developed and compiled for Intel processors (as well as PowerPC) as they were developed; the
  
   portability
  
  of its predecessor
  
   NeXTSTEP
  
  had been maintained. It is not publicly known whether Apple maintains current builds for any other architectures although the related
  
   iOS
  
  runs on the
  
   iPhone
  
  's
  
   ARM architecture
  
  .
 
  Steve Jobs stated that Apple's primary motivation for the transition was their disappointment with the progress of IBM's development of PowerPC technology, and their greater faith in Intel to meet Apple's needs. In particular, he cited the performance per
  
   watt
  
  projections in the
  
   roadmap
  
  provided by Intel.
  

    [12]
   

  This is an especially important consideration in laptop design, which affects the hours of use per battery charge.
 
  In June 2003, Jobs had introduced Macs based on the
  
   PowerPC G5
  
  processor and promised that within a year, the
  
   clock speed
  
  of the part would be up to 3
  
   GHz
  
  . Two years later, 3 GHz G5s were still not available, and rumors continued that IBM's low yields on the
  
   POWER4
  
  -derived chip were to blame. Further, the heat produced by the chip proved an obstacle to deploying it in a
  
   laptop
  
  computer, which had become the fastest growing segment of the
  
   personal computer
  
  industry.
 
  Some observers were surprised that Apple had not made a deal with
  
   AMD
  
  , which had in recent years become a strong competitor to Intel. AMD had recently released its competitive 64-bit
  
   Opteron
  
  platform,
  

    [13]
   



    [14]
   

  and by moving straight to
  
   x86-64
  
  Apple would have had one less architecture transition. Analysts have speculated that AMD's lack of low-power designs at the time were behind the decision to go with Intel.
  

    [12]
   

  However, in 2011, Apple investigated using AMD’s low power
  
   Llano APU
  
  for the
  
   MacBook Air
  
  , but eventually opted for Intel due to AMD's potential inability to supply enough Llano processors to meet demand.
  

    [15]
   


  Advocates of the transition pointed out the potential for the new Intel Mac systems to run four classes of software at native speeds: Mac OS X binaries,
  
   Java
  
  /
  
   .NET
  
  applications,
  
   Unix
  
  applications, and
  
   Win32
  
  /x86 applications.
 
  Originally,
  
   emulation
  
  software such as
  
   DOSBox
  
  or
  
   Microsoft Virtual PC
  
  was required to run x86 software on the Macintosh. Such software could now enjoy much more success with near-native performance through
  
   virtualization
  
  , such as is currently being done by
  
   Parallels Desktop for Mac
  
  and
  
   VMware Fusion
  
  . For those customers wishing to achieve a more conventional environment, a
  
   dual boot
  
  solution is possible on an x86 Apple device using
  
   Boot Camp
  
  software (which includes Windows drivers for Mac hardware). Some third-party partitioning options can even provide triple, or even quadruple boot.
 
  Although most games depend on the use of
  
   DirectX
  

   APIs
  
  not available on Mac OS X (on either processor type), it should be easier to port OS-independent code, such as
  
   OpenGL
  
  , now that developers no longer have to resolve
  
   endian
  
  , and other
  
   ISA
  
  dependency issues associated with moving from x86 to PowerPC.
 
  The announcement of Apple's intention to switch to Intel-based Macs caused concern because
  
   Rosetta
  
  , the PowerPC dynamic translator, when first announced, emulated a
  
   G3
  
  at only 60-80% of a similarly powered CPU's clock speed. Apart from this,
  
   Classic
  
  , the
  
   Mac OS 9
  
  virtualization for Mac OS X, was not ported to the x86 architecture, leaving the new Intel-powered Macs incompatible with original Mac OS applications without a proper third-party PowerPC emulator.
 
  The performance of Intel's
  
   chipsets
  
  was a concern, along with the x86 architecture itself, and whether it would affect system performance and application quality. Other problems include
  
   endianness
  
  and reduced floating point performance in real world applications relative to equivalent or contemporary PowerPC processors.
 
  It was also feared that it may be possible for Windows and Windows applications to run natively on Mac hardware, possibly killing off Mac OS X and/or applications developed for it. There was concern that the early announcement of the change would cause an
  
   Osborne effect
  
  , and there was the possibility that Intel could force Apple to use the
  
   Intel Inside
  
  branding. In addition, Apple had nurtured a feeling of animosity toward Intel among its loyal base. It would take time and money to convince Apple's most loyal customers that Intel was acceptable.
 
  There were also fears that Intel, which took part in the development and implementation of the
  
   USB
  
  , would force Apple to drop all development and support of its
  
   FireWire
  
  serial bus on all Intel Macs. This did not occur, as FireWire ports continued to be included on all Macs, except certain notebook configurations beginning with the
  
   MacBook Air
  
  in 2008, until being replaced by the faster
  
   Thunderbolt
  
  port.
 
  Many of these fears were put to rest at Macworld 2006 with the arrival of the first Intel-based Macs.
  
   Rosetta
  
  was improved to offer much faster speeds than originally demonstrated (though benchmarks suggest that PowerPC code still does not perform as well under emulation on a Core Duo iMac as it does on a G5 iMac
  

    [16]
   

  ). Intel's Core Duo CPUs perform nearly as well as the most powerful
  
   Power Mac G5
  
  towers, and outperformed the G5 chip in the 2005 model of iMac on both integer and floating point
  
   SPECmark
  
  tests.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  Applications native to both PPC and Intel-based Macs such as Safari web browser were found to perform better on the Intel-based Mac than on the PPC-based Mac. However,
  
   classic Mac OS
  
  applications will not run directly on Intel Macs. Pre-Mac OS X applications can only be run on Intel Macs by using
  
   emulators
  
  such as
  
   vMac
  
  ,
  
   Basilisk II
  
  , and
  
   SheepShaver
  
  , though the lack of stability of these emulators severely limits their functionality.
 
  Fears of an
  
   Osborne effect
  
  were dismissed after sales of Macs for the Christmas 2005 quarter saw an increase over the previous Christmas. Unlike Windows-based PC counterparts "Intel Inside" stickers have never been included on any Apple product.
  

    [17]
   


  There were questions over the extent to which Apple would retain control over the non-processor components of the system design. Apple is traditionally a systems builder, and some feared that Apple's
  
   industrial design
  
  philosophy may be affected if the company switched to commodity parts. Others noted that Apple has slowly been switching to standard parts since the introduction of the
  
   PCI
  
  Power Mac in 1995, and said that using a non-Apple chipset in itself would not harm the Mac's image.
 
  Intel Macs employ a different Intel technology for
  
   firmware
  
  ,
  
   Extensible Firmware Interface
  
  , not the
  
   Open Firmware
  
  Apple had been using. EFI removes the traditional PC reliance on the
  
   BIOS
  
  while providing more functionality.
  

    [18]
   


  The use of the x86 architecture allows Windows to run natively on Apple hardware, and opens the possibility of using the
  
   Wine package
  
  to run Windows executables directly. Some
  
   [
   


      who?
     


   ]
  
  fear that the change will make Mac OS X a less valuable target for software developers, since
  
   Mac OS X
  
  users can use a
  
   dual-boot
  
  setup or a Wine variant (such as
  
   CrossOver Mac
  
  or
  
   Darwine
  
  ) to run Windows apps instead. Others say that it could be a boon to
  
   switchers
  
  , since they would not have to leave their Windows applications behind while trying out Mac OS X. The idea of
  
   Mac OS X
  
  being available on regular PCs has also been discussed, but Apple has said that they will not allow regular PCs to run Mac OS X.
  

    [19]
   

  The
  
   OSx86
  
  Project, however, is able to install Mac OS X on non-Apple PCs. It was previously thought that since Windows XP is incompatible with the
  
   Extensible Firmware Interface
  
  , it would not be run on Intel-based Macs.
  

    [20]
   

  Prior to the Boot Camp announcement, a prize contest
  

    [21]
   

  resulted in a working solution for dual-booting Windows XP and Mac OS X on an Intel Mac. Microsoft has announced that
  
   Windows Vista
  
  will not be EFI-compatible on 32-bit platforms, but the later versions of Boot Camp allow Vista to be installed on any Intel Mac.
 
  Intel was seen among the Mac community as a purveyor of hot-running chips (especially the
  
   Pentium 4
  
  ). Apple themselves mocked the Pentium range in their "Toasted
  
   Bunnies
  
  " advertisements of the late 1990s. However, the
  
   Pentium M
  
  chips, which were designed for laptop use, run much cooler than the Pentium 4. Apple claimed the then-new Intel Core chips, which are based on the Pentium M microarchitecture, would have dramatically better performance per watt than the PowerPC G4 and G5.
 
  Finally, the relative quality of the x86 architecture has been discussed. Critics of the switch say that x86 was a poor choice because of its lack of
  
   hardware registers
  
  compared to the PowerPC, and the lack of
  
   AltiVec
  
  (also known as
  
   Velocity Engine
  
  ). Proponents have responded by saying that the x86 architecture has evolved greatly since the original 8086 was introduced, and that CPUs in general have combined
  
   RISC
  
  and
  
   CISC
  
  philosophies in their internal designs for some time, making the distinction obsolete. They also point out that improved
  
   SSE
  
  could equal
  
   AltiVec
  
  , and that most programmers rarely deal with x86's peculiarities because the
  
   compiler
  
  does the work.
 
  The Core Solo and Core Duo chips are
  
   32-bit
  
  designs. On August 7, 2006, Apple released the
  
   Mac Pro
  
  and Intel-based
  
   Xserve
  
  , introducing Intel 64 (Intel's implementation of
  
   x86-64
  
  ) architecture into the lineup through the use of the
  
   Xeon
  
  processor. As of August 7, 2007, all other computers in Apple's product line have been updated with the 64-bit Core 2 Duo.
 
  While the current benchmarks comparing Core Duo to Core 2 Duo processors show very little difference when running in 32 bit, the 64 bit edge has become more of an issue with the release of
  
   Mac OS X v10.6
  
  (Snow Leopard), and now users can dual boot Windows 7 in full 64-bit mode.
 
  Java applications (that do not rely on
  
   Java Native Interface
  
  ), some
  
   Dashboard
  

   Widgets
  
  , and
  
   scripts
  
  that execute inside an
  
   interpreter
  
  all work immediately on both processors and are immune to changes. Mac OS X applications that cannot be migrated run inside a PowerPC
  
   dynamic translator
  
  on Intel called "
  
   Rosetta
  
  ." Rosetta was originally limited to a
  
   G3
  
  instruction set, but currently supports
  
   AltiVec
  
  and the
  
   G4
  
  instruction set, leaving only the
  
   G5
  
  additions unsupported. Rosetta is an instruction translator comparable to the 68k emulator that allows PowerPC Macintoshes to run pre-PowerPC code, rather than a virtual system like
  
   Classic
  
  ; it does not require a second operating system to be loaded as a subsystem before the application can work.
 
  AltiVec itself has been encapsulated since
  
   Mac OS 10.3
  
  by a vectorization library; this library uses AltiVec on the PowerPC and
  
   SSE
  
  (or equivalent regular instructions) on x86.
 
  A new version of
  
   Xcode
  
  was released that supported the generation of
  
   Universal Binaries
  
  for Intel and PowerPC, the new system's equivalent of the earlier 68k-PowerPC
  
   fat binaries
  
  .
  
   Cocoa
  
  applications can be ported simply by recompiling them and checking for endianness problems.
  
   Carbon
  
  applications required some additional tuning, but not of the complexity of the transition from Mac OS 9. Applications written using
  
   Metrowerks
  

   CodeWarrior
  
  suite had to be modified; those that use
  
   PowerPlant
  
  required further code changes, described by Apple and Metrowerks.
 

   Classic
  
  is not supported on the x86 architecture. This means that pre-Mac OS X software does not run on Mac OS X out of the box, to which some users running older applications (such as
  
   QuarkXPress
  
  4 and 5) objected.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  However, third-party emulators, such as
  
   Mini vMac
  
  ,
  
   Basilisk II
  
  , and
  
   SheepShaver
  
  , have been ported to Intel-based Macs, allowing some pre-Mac OS X software to run.
 