

  The
  
   eMac
  
  , short for
  
   education Mac
  
  , is a
  
   Macintosh
  
  desktop computer made by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  It was originally aimed at the
  
   education
  
  market, but was later made available as a cheaper
  
   mass market
  
  alternative to Apple's
  
   second-generation LCD iMac G4
  
  . The eMac was pulled from retail on October 12, 2005 and was sold exclusively to educational institutions thereafter. It was discontinued by Apple on July 5, 2006 and replaced by a cheaper, low-end
  
   iMac
  
  that, like the eMac, was originally sold exclusively to educational institutions.
 
  The eMac design closely resembles the
  
   first-generation iMac
  
  . Compared to the first iMac, eMacs feature a
  
   PowerPC G4
  
  processor that is significantly faster than the previous generation
  
   G3
  
  processors, as well as a 17-inch flat
  
   CRT
  

   display
  
  , which was aimed at the education market, as LCD screens would be expensive. Unlike the iMac G3, however, the eMac is not meant to be portable as it weighs 50 lb (23 kg) and lacks a carrying handle which was on the iMac G3.
  

    [1]
   




  The eMac generally catered to the mass market, eventually taking over from the soon-to-be-discontinued iMac G3 to become the entry level Macintosh from 2003 to 2005, while the iMac G4 was positioned as a premium offering throughout its lifetime.
  

    [1]
   

  The eMac generally offered similar performance and features to the iMac G4 while they were sold side-by-side. The eMac was gradually supplanted by the
  
   iMac G5
  
  in 2005 to 2006.
 
  Apple introduced the eMac in April 2002. The eMac was originally intended exclusively for education buyers, but the demand for it was high enough that it was made available for general retail one month later. In the retail market, it was positioned as a lower-cost alternative to the recently released second-generation G4-powered iMac (known during its lifespan as "the new iMac", and as
  
   iMac G4
  
  after discontinuation). The new iMac's
  
   LCD
  
  , which at the time was significantly more costly than a CRT, made it considerably more expensive than its G3 predecessor, so the eMac was considered the more affordable upgrade for those looking for more processing power than the iMac G3.
 
  The eMac featured a 17-inch (430 mm) flat-screen
  
   CRT
  
  monitor, a
  
   Freescale
  
  PowerPC G4 processor running at 700 or 800
  
   MHz
  
  ,
  
   Nvidia
  

   GeForce2
  
  MX graphics, and built-in 18-watt stereo speakers. The retail models were priced at US$1,099 and US$1,499 which filled the price gap between the US$799 iMac G3 and the US$1499 iMac G4.
 
  Apple discontinued the iMac G3 line in March 2003 but did not fill the "cheap" price point until May 2003, when the eMac line was updated and its price brought down to old iMac levels. That revision brought the
  
   processor
  
  speed to 800 MHz and 1
  
   GHz
  
  and replaced the GeForce2 MX with an
  
   ATI
  

   Radeon
  

   7500
  
  graphics card.
 
  The eMac was further improved in October 2003, when the 800 MHz model was eliminated and the 1 GHz model was brought down in price. The more expensive 1 GHz model that included a
  
   SuperDrive
  
  was also made cheaper. This model was notable for being one of the least expensive brand-name
  
   computers
  
  at the time that could
  
   burn
  

   DVDs
  
  . It was both the last revision of the eMac able to run Apple's OS 9 operating system natively and the last Macintosh model sold that retained this capability.
 
  The next revision to the eMac line came in April 2004, with
  
   DDR SDRAM
  
  , a faster processor running at 1.25 GHz, and a better
  
   ATI
  

   Radeon 9200
  
  video chipset. The most recent revision came in May 2005, with an even faster CPU running at 1.42 GHz,
  
   Radeon 9600
  
  graphics, and larger standard
  
   hard disks
  
  .
 
  On October 12, 2005, Apple once again restricted sales of the eMac to educational institutions and returned to its "E is for Education" marketing plan that had been attached to the product from the original restriction to education buyers. The company re-implemented this restrictive measure for unspecified reasons. Some analysts believe Apple wanted to force the general public to purchase the more expensive
  
   Mac mini
  
  or iMac which had higher profit margins. Also, the eMac was the only CRT display product left in Apple's lineup which made it somewhat bulky compared to new offerings which had compact form factors due to LCD screens. The falling cost of LCD displays would also gradually bring down the prices of the
  
   iMac G5
  
  . However, the eMac was still available for sale to the general public through some third-party retailer websites.
 
  On July 5, 2006, the entire eMac line was discontinued. An "educational configuration" of the iMac Core Duo was introduced that same day, which has a Combo drive rather than a SuperDrive and a smaller hard disk of 80 GB.
 
  eMacs natively boot
  
   Mac OS 9.2.2
  
  and
  
   Mac OS X
  
  beginning with
  
   OS X 10.1.4
  
  . With the exception of some non-SuperDrive-equipped 1 GHz units, models 1 GHz and faster cannot boot OS 9, while eMacs slower than 1.0 GHz do not officially support
  
   10.5
  
  (requirements are an 867 MHz G4 with 512 MB ram). No model of eMac can run
  
   OS X 10.6 ("Snow Leopard")
  
  or higher, because Snow Leopard requires an Intel-based processor.
 
  A number of eMac machines have suffered from what was known as "Raster Shift", a phenomenon where the bottom third or half of the screen goes black, with the rest of image shifting upward and out of the top boundary of the display. Serious static also accompanies the problem, rendering the viewable part of the screen virtually useless. In response to the problem, Apple offered a solution which involved the replacement of a video cable inside the eMac's case.
  

    [2]
   



    [3]
   



