

  The
  
   Apple Macintosh II
  
  is the first personal computer model of the
  
   Macintosh II series
  
  in the
  
   Apple Macintosh
  
  line, and the first Macintosh to support a color display. A basic system with 20 MB drive and monitor cost
  
   US$5,498
  
  (equivalent to $11,590 in 2016). With a 13-inch color monitor and 8-bit display card the price was around
  
   US$7,145
  
  (equivalent to $15,062 in 2016).
  

    [1]
   

  This price placed it in competition with
  
   workstations
  
  from
  
   Silicon Graphics
  
  ,
  
   Sun Microsystems
  
  , and
  
   Hewlett-Packard
  
  .
 
  The Macintosh II was designed by
  
   hardware engineers
  

   Michael Dhuey
  
  (computer) and Brian Berkeley (monitor) and
  
   industrial designer
  

   Hartmut Esslinger
  
  (case).
 


  Two common criticisms of the Macintosh from its introduction in 1984 were the
  
   closed architecture
  
  and lack of color; rumors of a color Macintosh began almost immediately.
  

    [2]
   


  The Macintosh II project was begun by Dhuey and Berkeley during 1985 without the knowledge of Apple co-founder and Macintosh division head
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  , who opposed features like
  
   expansion slots
  
  and color, on the basis that the former complicated the user experience and the latter did not conform to
  
   WYSIWYG
  
  , since color printers were not common.
  

    [3]
   

  Initially referred to as "Little Big Mac", it was codenamed "
  
   Milwaukee
  
  " after Dhuey's hometown, and later went through a series of new names, including "Reno", "
  
   Uzi
  
  " and "Paris" (after
  
   Jean-Louis Gassee
  
  , Apple's then products manager, who protected the semi-clandestine project from cancellation).
  

    [4]
   

  After Jobs was fired from Apple in September 1985, the project could proceed openly.
 
  Introduced in March 1987 and retailing for US $5,498,
  

    [5]
   

  the Macintosh II was the first "modular" Macintosh model, so called because it came in a horizontal desktop case like many
  
   IBM PC compatibles
  
  of the time. All previous Macintosh computers used an
  
   all-in-one design with a built-in black-and-white CRT
  
  .
 
  The Macintosh II had
  
   drive bays
  
  for an internal hard disk (originally 40 MB or 80 MB) and an optional second floppy disk drive. It, along with the
  
   Macintosh SE
  
  , was the first Macintosh computer to use the
  
   Apple Desktop Bus
  
  (ADB) introduced with the
  
   Apple IIGS
  
  for keyboard and mouse interface.
 
  The primary improvement in the Mac II was Color
  
   QuickDraw
  
  in ROM, a color version of the graphics language which was the heart of the machine. Among the many innovations in Color QuickDraw were an ability to handle any display size, up to 8-bit color depth, and multiple monitors. Because Color QuickDraw was included in the Mac II's ROM and relied on new 68020 instructions, earlier Macintoshes could not be upgraded to display color.
 
  The Mac II featured a
  
   Motorola 68020
  
  processor operating at 16
  
   MHz
  
  teamed with a
  
   Motorola 68881
  

   floating point unit
  
  . The machine shipped with a socket for an MMU, but the "Apple HMMU Chip" (VLSI VI475 chip) was installed that did not implement virtual memory (instead, it translated 24-bit addresses to 32-bit addresses for the Mac OS, which was not 32-bit clean until
  
   System 7
  
  ). Standard memory was 1
  
   megabyte
  
  , expandable to 8 MB.
  

    [6]
   

  The Mac II had eight 30-pin SIMMs, and memory was installed in groups of four (called "Bank A" and "Bank B"). A 5.25-inch 40 MB internal
  
   SCSI
  
  hard disk was optional, as was a second internal 800 kilobyte 3.5-inch floppy disk drive. Six
  
   NuBus
  
  slots were available for expansion (at least one of which had to be used for a
  
   graphics card
  
  , as the Mac II had no onboard graphics chipset and the OS didn't support
  
   headless
  
  booting). It is possible to connect as many as six displays to a Macintosh II by filling all of the NuBus slots with graphics cards. Another option for expansion included the
  
   Mac286
  
  , which included an
  
   Intel 80286
  
  chip and could be used for
  
   MS-DOS
  
  emulation.
 
  The original ROMs in the Macintosh II contained a bug which prevented the system from recognizing more than one megabyte of memory address space on a Nubus card. Every Macintosh II manufactured up until about November 1987 had this defect. This happened because Slot Manager was not
  
   32-bit clean
  
  .
  

    [7]
   

  Apple offered a well publicized recall of the faulty ROMs and released a program to test whether a particular Macintosh II had the defect. As a result, it is rare to find a Macintosh II with the original ROMs.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  The Macintosh II and
  
   Macintosh SE
  
  were the first Apple computers since the
  
   Apple I
  
  to be sold without a keyboard. Instead the customer was offered the choice of the new ADB
  
   Apple Keyboard
  
  or the
  
   Apple Extended Keyboard
  
  as a separate purchase. Dealers could bundle a third-party keyboard or attempt to
  
   upsell
  
  a customer to the more expensive (and higher-profit) Extended Keyboard.
 
  The Macintosh II was followed by a
  
   series
  
  of related models including the
  
   Macintosh IIx
  
  and
  
   Macintosh IIfx
  
  , all of which used the
  
   Motorola 68030
  
  processor. It was possible to upgrade a Macintosh II to a Macintosh IIx or IIfx with a motherboard swap. The Macintosh II was the first Macintosh to have the
  
   Chimes of Death
  
  accompany the
  
   Sad Mac
  
  logo whenever a serious hardware error occurred.
 
  The new extensions featured for the Macintosh II at the time were
  
   A/ROSE
  
  and Sound Manager.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  The card was unaccelerated, but it had a 16.7 million color palette (true color).
  

    [8]
   

  It supported two resolutions, 512×384 and 640×480 (supporting Apple's fixed-resolution 12" and 13" color monitors respectively) and was available in two configurations, 4-bit and 8-bit. The 4-bit model supports 16 colors on a 640×480 display, 256 colors (8-bit video) on a 512×384 display, which means that
  
   VRAM
  
  was 256 KB. The 8-bit model supports 8-bit/256-color video on a 640×480 display, which means that VRAM was 512 KB in size. With an optional RAM upgrade (requires eight 120 ns DIP chips), the 4-bit version supports 640×480 in 8-bit color.
  

    [9]
   



   This section also applies to the
   
    Macintosh IIx
   
   ,
   
    Macintosh IIcx
   
   , and
   
    Macintosh SE/30
   
   .
  

  The original Macintosh II did not have a PMMU by default. It relied on the memory controller hardware to map the installed memory into a contiguous address space. This hardware had the restriction that the address space dedicated to bank A must be larger than those of bank B. Though this memory controller was designed to support up to 16MB 30-pin SIMMs for up to 128MB of RAM, the original Macintosh II ROMs had problems limiting the amount of RAM that can be installed to 8MB. The Macintosh IIx ROMs that also shipped with the FDHD upgrade fixed this problem, though still do not have a 32-bit Memory Manager and cannot boot into 32-bit addressing mode under Mac OS (without the assistance of
  
   MODE32
  
  ).
  

    [10]
   


   MODE32
  
  contained a workaround that allowed larger SIMMs to be put in Bank B with the PMMU installed. In this case, the ROMs at boot think that the computer has 8MB or less of RAM. MODE32 then reprograms the memory controller to dedicate more address space to Bank A, allowing the additional memory in Bank B to be accessed. Since after that the physical address space is not contiguous, the PMMU is then use to remap the address space into a contiguous block.
 