

  The
  
   Apple Keyboard
  
  is a
  
   keyboard
  
  designed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  first for the Apple line, then the
  
   Macintosh
  
  line of computers. Dozens of models have been released over time, including the
  
   Apple Extended Keyboard
  
  . There are currently two keyboards offered by Apple: a full-sized version using
  
   USB
  
  , and the
  
   Apple Magic Keyboard
  
  , which connects via
  
   Bluetooth
  
  and omits the numeric keypad of the full-sized model.
 
  Both share a similar look and feel, based on a very thin aluminum chassis and laptop-style low-profile keys, sitting much closer to the tabletop than traditional keyboard designs.
 


  To serve the functionality of the
  
   Macintosh operating systems
  
  (and because of historical differences), the Apple Keyboard's
  
   layout
  
  differs somewhat from that of the ubiquitous
  
   IBM PC keyboard
  
  , mainly in its
  
   modifier
  
  and special keys. Some of these keys have unique symbols defined in the
  
   Unicode
  
  block
  
   Miscellaneous Technical
  
  . Features different from other keyboards include:
 
  The
  
   Macintosh
  
  keyboards are somewhat reminiscent of the keyboards used for the
  
   Apple II
  
  .
 
  Apple's very first offering, the
  
   Apple I
  
  , was initially sold as a naked
  
   PCB
  
  without a keyboard (or a case), although some resellers and users fitted their own cases with built-in keyboards and Apple cooperated with at least one such reseller.
 
  Starting in 1977, the first real Apple keyboards were built into the cases of the
  
   Apple II
  
  series and the later
  
   Apple III
  
  series systems. These first keyboards had chocolate brown keycaps with white legends. The Apple II and Apple II+ keyboard had 52 keys, the Apple III keyboard, which included a numeric pad and some other additional keys, had 74. In 1983, the new Apple IIe and Apple III+ models introduced a beige keyboard with smaller black legends. In the same year, Apple introduced its first separate keyboard with the
  
   Lisa
  
  ; it incorporated a numeric keypad and lighter taupe-colored keycaps. It connected via a unique
  
   TRS
  
  port. The
  
   Macintosh
  
  updated the look somewhat and separated the (optional) numerical keypad from the alphanumeric unit, all of which connected by telephone-style modular cables. By 1986, the
  
   Macintosh Plus
  
  re-integrated the numerical keypad and became the standard for all successive keyboards. However, it also marked the last of the beige Apple-II-era designs which were usurped by the newer
  
   Snow White design language
  
  .
 
  From the end of 1986 until mid-1998, all new Apple keyboards were "Platinum" gray and connected via the
  
   Apple Desktop Bus
  
  (ADB). The Apple IIe and IIc line continued with integrated keyboards, as did the
  
   PowerBook
  
  portable line of course, those of the latter being a darker gray color called "Smoke". During the 90s, Apple offered various styles of keyboard, including the large
  
   extended keyboards
  
  which included the features of their
  
   IBM PC AT
  
  counterparts.
 
  The release of the
  
   first iMac
  
  in October 1998 introduced a matching compact, translucent-plastic keyboard based on laptop technology and marked the transition from ADB to
  
   USB
  
  . In July 2000, it was replaced with the full-sized Pro Keyboard, having slightly translucent black keys and a clear case. The PowerBook and
  
   iBook
  
  integrated keyboards followed suit with translucent keys first in bronze (PowerBook), then in black (PowerBook) and white (iBook). Coinciding with the introduction of the
  
   iMac G4
  
  in 2002, Apple started making its keyboards white. On the
  
   Bluetooth
  

   Wireless Keyboard
  
  , Apple removed the adjustable feet from the back of the keyboard, giving it a solid base. This design was later quietly introduced on the wired version. The
  
   Aluminum PowerBooks
  
  added another color, opaque aluminum with sometimes-backlit translucent legends, to the array of keyboard styles in use.
 
  On August 7, 2007, Apple introduced their current generation of keyboards. The new model is much thinner than its predecessors, requiring less wrist flexing and a slightly lower hand position for most users. Taking a cue from the portables, it has an aluminum enclosure, and the USB ports have been, once again, relocated to the right and left ends of the keyboard case. Software function and hardware control keys have a new arrangement, and there are keys associated with specific features of
  
   macOS
  
  , such as
  
   Dashboard
  
  . In order to properly use these new features, a computer must be updated as of the initial ship date of the keyboards, usually with the built-in
  
   Software Update
  
  .
  

    [4]
   


  On March 3, 2009, Apple introduced an additional keyboard to their latest line of keyboards. The new keyboard is similar to the wireless keyboard due to the absence of the numeric keypad, however it is a wired keyboard with 2 USB 2.0 ports similar to the standard keyboard. Until this time the typical keyboard with the numeric keypad was titled "Apple Keyboard", now the more-compact keyboard carries the name "Apple Keyboard" and the standard keyboard with numeric keys is titled "Apple Keyboard with Numeric Keypad".
  

    [5]
   


  Apple's older ADB (
  
   Apple Desktop Bus
  
  ) keyboards are compatible with other ADB-based systems, such as those from Next and Sony (and vice versa for their non-Apple ADB keyboards). When using a USB adapter (such as the Griffin iMate), they function similarly to Apple's later USB keyboards, although there can be problems using such setups with later versions of
  
   macOS
  
  . Although external ADB ports ceased to be used after the
  
   Power Macintosh G3 (Blue & White)
  
  , Apple still used ADB as the internal protocol for their laptop keyboards and trackpads until the last-generation PowerBooks and iBooks; for this reason, ADB drivers can still be found in
  
   Mac OS X 10.5
  
  but not
  
   Mac OS X 10.6
  
  . Even with these operating systems, it is possible to use ADB devices with a USB adapter.
 
  Apple's USB keyboards are mostly compatible with Windows computers, and can be remapped; the Command key works as the Windows key, the
  
   ⌥ Option
  
  key as the Alt key, the
  
   Help key
  
  as the
  
   Insert
  
  key, and the
  
   Clear
  
  key as the
  
   Num Lock
  
  key. On the slightly older all-white models, the volume keys function as they would on a Macintosh, and the eject key has no function. With the new models released in August 2007 the volume, brightness, Exposé, dashboard, eject and media controls no longer work without installing Apple's Boot Camp software. This software allows for the volume, brightness, eject and media controls buttons to work properly, though the Exposé and dashboard buttons still do nothing because Windows lacks this functionality.
 
  The additional function keys placed where the
  
   Print Screen
  
  /
  
   SysRq
  
  ,
  
   Scroll Lock
  
  , and
  
   Pause/Break
  
  keys are on most IBM PC keyboards (F13/F14 through F15/F16) do not work as those keys in Windows without a special driver. Apple has since released a driver, though it is only available bundled with
  
   Boot Camp
  
  .
 
  The USB keyboard is also combined with a two-
  
   port
  
  USB
  
   hub
  
  , with the hub being
  
   USB 1.1
  
  on older keyboards and
  
   USB 2.0
  
  on the August 2007 model.
 
  The Numeric Keypad IIe was Apple's first external keypad. Released as an option specifically for the popular Apple IIe computer in 1983, it helped correct some of the II series' shortcomings. Later the Platinum IIe would incorporate the numeric keypad into its built-in keyboard.
 
  The first keyboard not to be integrated into the
  
   CPU
  
  case like the Apple II and III series before it. It was designed for and came with the
  
   Apple Lisa
  
  . Like the Apple III before it, it was intended to be a business computer and included an integrated numeric keypad. Like all Apple computers before it, it came in a beige case to match the CPU and connected by a unique
  
   TRS connector
  
  . In addition it carried over the use of the "open" Apple key from the Apple III as a command key (though it was represented by the "close" Apple character) and included a pullout reference guide hidden under the keyboard.
 
  Introduced and included with the original Macintosh in 1984, it debuted with neither arrow keys to control the cursor nor an integrated numeric keypad. It used a telephone cord-style connector to the case (also used with the Amstrad PCW series of computers). The keyboard
  
   pinouts
  
  are "crossed" so it isn't possible to use a standard telephone cord as replacement. The keyboard also introduced a unique command key similar to the "open" Apple Key on the Lisa.
 
  Like the Apple IIe before it, the Macintosh provided an optional external keypad which also included arrow keys that daisy chained to the CPU via the telephone-cord connectors. Though introduced with the Macintosh in January 1984, Apple did not ship it until September 1984 at a retail price of US$99.
 
  Introduced and included with the Macintosh Plus in 1986, it was an extended keyboard that had a built-in numeric keypad. In 1987 it was updated to Apple's new Platinum gray color. It continued to use the telephone-cord style connector to the system and was interchangeable with the M0110. Though Apple switched all other keyboards to
  
   Apple Desktop Bus
  
  connectors by this time, this keyboard was manufactured unchanged for four more years until the Plus was discontinued in 1990.
 
  This was the first Apple keyboard to use the new
  
   Apple Desktop Bus
  
  (ADB) connector first seen on the
  
   Apple IIGS
  
  . Designed to be compatible with both the Macintosh and Apple product lines, it was the first to combine both the Macintosh command key and Apple II "open" Apple key legends. Entirely Platinum gray in color (the Macintosh Plus has darker gray keys called "Smoke"), it was also the first to use
  
   Snow White design language
  
  that was similar to the Apple IIc. However, it duplicated the extended design established by the Plus. It was also the first to include an external power/reset button and an extra ADB port.
 
  Also known as the
  
   Apple Standard Keyboard
  
  , it was the first to officially use this name. Apple would later reuse the name for a series of successive keyboards. The
  
   Apple Keyboard
  
  was a more solid version of the
  
   Apple Desktop Bus Keyboard
  
  and optionally included with the
  
   Macintosh II
  
  and
  
   SE
  
  in 1987. The heftier design solidified visually the power performance embodied by the upgraded Macs. Aside from weight the main difference was the significantly thicker frame width. It was the first keyboard to be sold separately from the system, giving the customer a choice of the basic or advanced keyboards offered by Apple.
 
  Apple's advanced keyboard, the first to be sold optionally, was essentially a redesigned version of the
  
   Apple Keyboard,
  
  with an
  
   enhanced
  
  extended keyboard with
  
   FKeys
  
  and other
  
   PC-style keys
  
  . It included template guides above the top row of function keys to accommodate shortcut key references which accommodate many software packages. It was the heaviest of all the Macintosh keyboards and set the standard for many typists. It was sold separately from any Apple computer and retailed for US$163.
 
  Introduced and sold with the
  
   Macintosh Classic
  
  and
  
   LC
  
  in 1990, this keyboard was almost identical to the original ADB Keyboard, but included flip down feet to change the typing angle and a design change that gave the frame and keys a more streamlined appearance. Internally, the M0487 differed from the original M0116, as the M0487 did not use mechanical keyswitches (save for the Caps Lock). In 1993, the
  
   Macintosh TV
  
  , the first Mac introduced in all black, came with an identical black Keyboard II (using the same model number). This keyboard marked the return of Apple including a standard keyboard together with the computer itself.
 
  A minor update to the
  
   Apple Extended Keyboard
  
  to coincide with the release of the
  
   Macintosh IIsi
  
  in 1990, it added an adjustable height feature.
 
  The Apple
  
   Apple Adjustable Keyboard
  
  , which was sold optionally, was Apple's 1993 entry into the ergonomic adjustable keyboard market. It was often criticized for its flimsy construction. It came with a separate keypad (not sold separately), the first to do so since the original
  
   Macintosh
  
  keyboard.
 
  In the mid-90's Apple released the
  
   Apple Newton
  
  sub-mini keyboard to allow a quick input alternative to the Newton's handwriting recognition, which required extensive training to become useful. It connected via the Newton's serial interface. Many Mac users favoring the portable size were able to use it on a Mac utilizing a third-party enabler. In a foreshadowing of the
  
   iPhone
  
  to come, the Newton also included a
  
   virtual keyboard
  
  .
 
  This was the first major redesign of the Apple keyboard, featuring more fluid, curving lines to match the look of the new Apple product style. It was an unpopular replacement for the
  
   Apple Extended Keyboard II
  
  in 1994. Significantly lighter than its predecessors, it had a much softer and quieter key interface that was unpopular with many typists. It also included only one ADB port for mice or other pointing devices, concealed on the underside, with the keyboard's cable permanently attached.
  

    [6]
   

  The Extended II had an ADB port on either side of the keyboard, allowing the keyboard cable or mouse to be attached to the side preferred by the user. This keyboard was also produced in black using the same model number (like the
  
   Apple Keyboard II
  
  before it), for inclusion with the
  
   Macintosh TV
  
  , black
  
   Performa 5420
  
  released primarily in Europe, and the black
  
   Power Macintosh 5500
  
  released in Asia.
 
  Bundled with the
  

    Twentieth Anniversary Macintosh
   

  in 1997, this keyboard once again excluded an integrated keypad, though unlike the
  
   Adjustable Keyboard
  
  none was offered. Based around a
  

    PowerBook
   

  form factor it also included an optional built-in
  
   trackpad
  
  and leather palm rests. This was the last ADB keyboard Apple would produce, and was not sold separately.
 
  Released and sold with the
  
   iMac
  
  in 1998 this became the new standard for all Macintosh models for the next two years. It was the first to use translucent plastics, first in
  
   Bondi blue
  
  , then in a darker gray called "Graphite" for the PowerMac G4 line and fruit-colored for each of the five first color variations of the iMac. It had a built-in adjustable stand. It also marked a return to the standard keyboard with integrated keypad with the enhanced cursor keys above the keypad. Also, the keyboard had a power button on the top right side. This keyboard works with Windows except for the power button.
 
  Originally introduced as the Apple Pro Keyboard in 2000, but three years later it was discontinued. This keyboard reintroduced the additional extended function keys last seen in the
  
   Apple Design Keyboard
  
  and debuted in a clear case with black keys. Later a white key version was also offered. One major departure from all previous ADB & USB keyboards was the removal of the remote power key. This keyboard contained 108 keys (ANSI).
 