

  The
  
   iMac G4
  
  is an
  
   all-in-one
  
  desktop computer produced and sold by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  from 2002 to mid-2004, succeeding the egg-shaped
  
   iMac G3
  
  and being succeeded by the
  
   iMac G5
  
  .
 


  The iMac G4 features an
  
   LCD
  
  mounted on an adjustable arm above a hemisphere containing a full-size, tray-loading optical drive and a fourth-generation
  
   PowerPC G4 74xx-series
  
  processor. The internals such as the hard drive, motherboard, etc. was placed in the "dome" instead of the LCD panel as it would be too heavy. The arm allowed the display to hold almost any angle around the dome-shaped bottom. The iMac G4 was sold only in white, and was not translucent like the iMac G3. The machine was sold with the Apple Pro Keyboard and
  
   Apple Pro Mouse
  
  , which would be later redesigned and renamed the
  
   Apple Keyboard
  
  and
  
   Apple Mouse
  
  , respectively. Optional Apple Pro Speakers, which were of better quality than the internal speakers, were also available. The Apple Pro Speakers use a unique adapter, designed to work only with a select few Apple Macintosh models.
 
  The iMac G4 originally included both
  
   Mac OS 9
  
  and
  
   Mac OS X
  
  , due to the machine being released the year Mac OS 9 was discontinued. When running newer versions of Mac OS X (Tiger and Leopard), the iMac G4's GeForce4 MX GPU is not capable of Core Image rendering. This causes some minor graphical issues. One such issue would be the lack of the
  
   Dashboard
  
  ripple effect when a widget is introduced. Another would be an opaque menu bar in
  
   Mac OS X Leopard
  
  .
 
  It was originally known as the
  
   The New iMac
  
  , while the existing
  
   iMac G3
  
  continued to be sold for several months. During this time, Apple had all but eliminated CRT displays from its product line. However, the LCD iMacs were unable to match the low price point of the iMac G3, largely due to the higher cost of the LCD technology at the time. The iMac G3 was obsolete by this point, but low-cost machines were particularly important for the education market. Because of this affordability issue, Apple created the
  
   eMac
  
  in April 2002 and ended production of the iMac G3. The iMac G4 was then marketed as the "iMac" until its discontinuation, then was
  
   retroactively
  
  labeled
  
   iMac G4
  
  to distinguish itself from the succeeding
  
   iMac G5
  
  in August 2004.
 

  Apple advertised the iMac G4 as having the adjustability of a desk lamp, and was nicknamed the
  
   "iLamp"
  
  , similar to "
  
   Luxo Jr.
  
  ", who was featured in a short film produced by
  
   Pixar
  
  , another venture of Apple co-founder
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  . One of the advertisements for the machine featured it sitting in a store window "reacting" to every move made by a passer-by on the street. At the end, when the man sticks out his tongue, the iMac responds by opening its optical drive.
  

    [1]
   

  It was also known as the "Sunflower".
 
  The
  
   Gateway
  
  Profile was one of the few
  
   Wintel
  
  competitors to the iMac G4 in the all-in-one LCD computer market. A reviewer noted that the Profile had better processing power, due to its Intel
  
   Pentium 4
  
  , whereas the iMac was hampered because its G4 chip lacked the 1 MB L2 cache found on the higher-end Power Mac. The iMac had clear advantages in LCD screen quality (it uses a digital LCD as opposed to an analog LCD),
  
   ergonomics
  
  (particularly the flexible monitor arm), and multimedia. The reviewer concluded that the iMac worked well as an introduction to the Macintosh ecosystem, but noted that their relatively high prices were approaching that of laptops, which are portable and have higher resolution LCD screens.
  

    [2]
   





