

  The
  
   iMac G3
  
  is a line of personal computers developed, manufactured, and sold by
  
   Apple Computer
  
  from 1998 to 2003. Noted for its innovative design via the use of translucent and brightly colored
  
   plastics
  
  , it was the first consumer-facing Apple product to debut under the recently returned interim
  
   CEO
  

   Steve Jobs
  
  . It was updated over time with new hardware and colors, until being supplanted by the
  
   iMac G4
  
  and
  
   eMac
  
  in 2002.
 
  The iMac G3, among other factors, was responsible for Apple's turnaround from financial ruin in the late 1990s and revitalized the Apple brand as design-oriented and simple. It was, nevertheless, criticized for abandoning then-current technological standards like the floppy drive and the
  
   Apple Desktop Bus
  
  connector in favor of the emerging
  
   USB
  
  standard.
 



   Steve Jobs
  
  reduced the company's large product lines immediately upon becoming Apple's interim CEO in 1997. Toward the end of the year, Apple trimmed its line of desktop Macs down to the beige
  
   Power Macintosh G3
  
  series, which included the iMac's immediate predecessor, the
  
   Power Macintosh G3 All In One
  
  , which featured nearly identical specifications and was sold only to the educational market. Having discontinued the consumer-targeted
  
   Performa
  
  series, Apple needed a replacement for the Performa's price point. The company announced the
  
   iMac
  
  on May 6, 1998
  

    [1]
   

  and began shipping the iMac G3 on August 15, 1998.
 
  Internally, the iMac was a combination of the
  
   MacNC project
  
  and
  
   Common Hardware Reference Platform
  
  (CHRP).
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  Although the promise of CHRP has never been fully realized, the work that Apple had done on CHRP significantly helped in the designing of the iMac. The original iMac used a
  
   PowerPC G3
  
  (PowerPC 750) processor, which also ran in Apple's high-end
  
   Power Macintosh
  
  line at the time, though at higher speeds. It sold for US$1,299, and shipped with
  
   Mac OS 8.1
  
  , which was soon upgraded to Mac OS 8.5.
 
  The iMac was continually updated after its initial release. Aside from increasing specifications (processor speed, video RAM and hard-disk capacity), Apple replaced Bondi Blue with new colors. Throughout its lifespan, the iMac was released in a total of thirteen colors.
 
  A later hardware update created a sleeker design. This second-generation iMac featured a slot-loading optical drive,
  
   FireWire
  
  , "fanless" operation (through
  
   free convection
  
  cooling), a slightly updated shape, and the option of
  
   AirPort
  

   wireless networking
  
  . Apple continued to sell this line of iMacs until March 2003, mainly to customers who wanted the ability to run the older Mac OS 9 operating system. USB and FireWire support, and support for
  
   dial-up
  
  ,
  
   Ethernet
  
  , and
  
   wireless networking
  
  (via
  
   802.11b
  
  and
  
   Bluetooth
  
  ) soon became standard across Apple's entire product line. The addition of high-speed FireWire corrected the deficiencies of the earlier iMacs.
 
  The iMac CRT model, now targeted at the education market, was
  
   renamed
  
  the iMac G3, and kept in production alongside its
  
   iMac G4
  
  successor until the
  
   eMac
  
  was released. As Apple continued to release new versions of its computers, the term
  
   iMac
  
  continued to be used to refer to machines in its consumer desktop line.
 
  The iMac was dramatically different from any previous mainstream computer. It was made of translucent "Bondi Blue"-colored plastic, and was egg-shaped around a 14-inch (35.5 cm)
  
   CRT display
  
  . The case included a handle, and the peripheral connectors were hidden behind a door on the right-hand side of the machine. Dual headphone jacks in the front complemented the built-in stereo speakers. Sir
  
   Jonathan Ive
  
  , currently Chief Design Officer at Apple, is credited with the industrial design. Its unique shape and color options helped ingrain itself into late 1990s
  
   pop culture
  
  . The iMac was the first computer to exclusively offer
  
   USB
  
  ports as standard,
  

    [2]
   

  including as the connector for its new keyboard and mouse,
  

    [3]
   

  thus abandoning previous Macintosh peripheral connections, such as the
  
   ADB
  
  ,
  
   SCSI
  
  and
  
   GeoPort
  
  serial ports.
 
  A further radical step was to abandon the 3½-inch
  
   floppy disk drive
  
  which had been present in every Macintosh since the first in 1984. Apple argued that
  
   recordable CDs
  
  , the Internet, and office networks were quickly making diskettes obsolete, however, Apple's omission generated controversy.
  

    [4]
   

  At the time of iMac's introduction, third-party manufacturers offered external USB floppy disk drives, often in translucent plastic to match the iMac's enclosure. Apple had initially announced the internal
  
   modem
  
  in the iMac would operate at only 33.6 kbit/s rather than the new 56 kbit/s speed, but was forced by consumer pressure to adopt the faster standard.
 
  Components such as the front-mounted
  
   IrDA
  
  port and the tray-loading
  
   CD-ROM
  
  drive were borrowed from the Apple laptops. Although the iMac did not officially have an
  
   expansion slot
  
  , the first versions had a slot dubbed the "mezzanine slot".
  

    [5]
   

  It was only for internal use by Apple, although a few third-party expansion cards were released for it, such as a Voodoo II video card upgrade from
  
   3dfx
  
  and
  
   SCSI
  
  /SCSI-
  
   TV tuner
  
  cards (iProRAID and iProRAID TV) from the German company Formac. The mezzanine slot was removed from later iMacs, though according to an article in the German computer magazine
  

    c't
   

  , the socket can be retrofitted on revision C iMacs.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  The keyboard and
  
   mouse
  
  were redesigned for the iMac with translucent plastics and a Bondi Blue trim. The Apple USB Keyboard was smaller than Apple's previous keyboards, with white characters on black keys, both features that attracted debate. The Apple USB Mouse was mechanical, of a round, "
  
   hockey puck
  
  " design which was derided as being unnecessarily difficult for users with larger hands. Apple continued shipping the round mouse, adding a divot to the button in later versions so that users could distinguish proper orientation by feel. Eventually, a new capsule-shaped optical mouse, known as the
  
   Apple Mouse
  
  (formerly "Apple Pro Mouse"), replaced the round mouse across all of Apple's hardware offerings.
 
  Apple updated the iMac over time to feature different colors. January 1999 saw the launch of Blueberry, Grape, Tangerine, Lime and Strawberry.
  

    [6]
   

  Graphite was shortly thereafter made available as a Special Edition colour. The five fruit colours were later replaced with Ruby, Sage, Indigo and Snow. Ruby and Sage were later replaced by two limited-edition designs, "Blue
  
   Dalmatian
  
  " and "Flower Power" patterns. The final lineup consisted uniquely of Indigo, Snow and Graphite, later limited to Snow only before being discontinued.
 
  The first iteration of the iMac G3 featured a 15-inch (13.8-inch viewable) CRT display, 233 MHz processor, ATI Rage IIc graphics, 4 GB hard drive, tray-loading CD-ROM drive, two USB ports, a 56 kbit/s Modem, built-in Ethernet, infrared port, built-in stereo speakers, and two headphone ports. The CPU and memory were located on the same 'Daughter Card', which installed directly onto the motherboard.
  

    [7]
   

  It came exclusively in a translucent "Bondi Blue" plastic, and was known as Revision A. On October 17, the iMac was updated with ATI Rage Pro graphics. This updated Revision B model maintained its predecessor's original price of $1299. The iMac had its infrared and mezzanine features removed with the introduction of the Revision C model on January 5, 1999, dropping in price to US$1199. Hard drive capacity increased and a faster processor was added. The Bondi Blue color was discontinued and replaced by five new colors: Strawberry, Blueberry, Lime, Grape, and Tangerine. A final update, Revision D, was released on April 14, 1999, which maintained its previous specifications save a faster processor.
 
  In some cases, it is possible to interchange parts between different revisions or install third-party internal parts. For example, the iMac G3 in Bondi Blue shown below had its motherboard replaced with one from a 266 MHz Grape model, while the
  
   CD-ROM
  
  drive was replaced with a
  
   CompactFlash
  

   memory card reader
  
  that is running
  
   Mac OS X Tiger
  
  .
 
  On October 5, 1999, Apple discontinued the tray-loading iMac. The new iMac built upon the Revision D's success with a faster processor, double the RAM, improvements to the built-in speaker system, a slot-loading optical drive, faster ATI Rage 128 VR graphics, a slightly updated case, and support for Apple's 802.11b
  
   AirPort
  
  wireless networking card. The iMac was joined by two additional standard configurations, the iMac DV ("digital video") and iMac DV Special Edition. Designed to support home movie editing, the iMac DV had a more powerful processor, a VGA-out port,
  
   DVD-ROM
  
  drive, larger hard drive, and two
  
   FireWire
  
  ports for US$1299, in new shades of all five Revision D colors. The iMac DV Special Edition doubled the RAM again and increased hard drive capacity to 13 GB at US$1499, and was available in an exclusive Graphite color. All iMac (slot-loading) models featured convection cooling, keeping them nearly silent during operation.
  

    [11]
   


  On July 19, 2000, Apple reduced the price of the entry-level iMac to US$799. Hardware changes were minimal; the AirPort card slot was removed (for the base configuration), the USB Mouse was replaced with an
  
   Apple Pro Mouse
  
  , the ATI Rage 128 VR graphics were upgraded to an ATI Rage 128 Pro version, and it was made available in a darker shade of blue called Indigo, replacing Blueberry. The iMac DV was reduced to US$999, dispensing with the DVD-ROM replaced by a CD-ROM drive, and was available in Indigo and Ruby. At the former price point of the iMac DV, the iMac DV+ was introduced, sporting faster processor and larger hard drive than its predecessor in Indigo, Ruby, and the exclusive Sage. The iMac DV Special Edition remained at the same price but gained a 500 MHz processor, 30 GB hard drive, and was available in Graphite and the exclusive Snow.
 
  On February 22, 2001, Apple consolidated its configurations to three. The iMac DV was renamed iMac and made the base-entry configuration; it was available only in Indigo at US$899. A second entry-level configuration was introduced with a 500 MHz processor, new ATI Rage 128 Ultra graphics, and 20 GB hard drive in Indigo, along with two patterns: Flower Power and Blue Dalmatian that were molded into the plastic exterior. The iMac DV Special Edition was renamed iMac Special Edition and was available in Graphite and the two new patterns, with a faster processor, double the RAM, and a 40 GB hard drive at the same US$1499 price.
 
  The final revision, released July 18, 2001, kept the three model line now with a 500, 600, or 700 MHz processor, available in Indigo, Graphite, and Snow. Following the introduction of the faster
  
   iMac G4
  
  in January 2002, the 700 MHz model was discontinued. The 500 MHz Indigo and 600 MHz Graphite models were subsequently discontinued later in 2002, leaving only the 600 MHz Snow model available for sale until March 2003, when the release of the low-cost
  
   eMac
  
  replaced it.
 




     (SE)
    








     (SE)
    




     (SE)
     

       •
      



       ✿
      

     (SE and regular)
    








     (SE and regular)
    
  Apple protected the iMac design with legal action against competing computer makers who attempted to imitate the iMac, such as
  
   eMachines
  
  ’
  
   eOne
  
  .
  

    [14]
   

  Some manufacturers added translucent plastics to existing designs after the iMac, following the trend started in 1997 by
  
   Dyson
  
  .
  

    [15]
   

  In 1999, Apple obtained the registered
  
   domain name
  
  appleimac.com from Abdul Traya, after legal intervention. The website now automatically redirects to the company's website.
  

    [16]
   



