

  The
  
   Power Mac G4 Cube
  
  is a
  
   small form factor
  

   Macintosh
  

   personal computer
  
  from
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  , sold between 2000 and 2001. Designed by
  
   Jonathan Ive
  
  , its cube shape is reminiscent of the
  
   NeXTcube
  
  from
  
   NeXT
  
  , acquired by Apple in 1996. The New York
  
   Museum of Modern Art
  
  holds a G4 Cube, along with its distinctive
  
   Harman Kardon
  
  transparent speakers, as part of its collection.
  

    [1]
   




  The small 7×7×7 in (18×18×18 cm) cube, suspended in a 7.65×7.65×10 in (19.4×19.4×25.4 cm)
  
   acrylic glass
  
  enclosure, housed a
  
   PowerPC G4
  
  processor running at 450 or 500 MHz, and had a unique, slot-loading, low-profile
  
   DVD-ROM
  
  or
  
   CD-RW
  
  drive. A separate monitor, with either an
  
   ADC
  
  or a
  
   VGA
  
  connection, was required for the Cube, in contrast to the all-in-one
  
   iMac
  
  series. Also unlike the iMacs, it had a video card in a standard
  
   AGP slot
  
  . However, there was not enough space for full-length cards. The Cube also featured two
  
   FireWire
  
  400 ports and two
  
   USB
  
  1.1 ports for connecting peripherals. The Cube is exceptional as the only Macintosh without a built-in speaker (as of 2016). Sound was provided by an external USB amplifier and a pair of
  
   Harman Kardon
  
  speakers. Although the USB amplifier had a standard mini-plug headphone output, it lacked any audio input. The Cube also used a silent, fanless,
  
   convection
  
  -based cooling system like the iMacs of the time.
 
  Apple targeted the Cube at the market between the
  
   iMac G3
  
  and the
  
   Power Mac G4
  
  , and was the first desktop configuration offering since the discontinued
  
   Power Macintosh G3
  
  almost two years earlier. Despite its innovative design, critics complained it was too expensive—it was initially priced US $200 higher than the similarly equipped Power Mac G4 (450 MHz CPU, 64 MB RAM, 20 GB hard drive) and did not include a monitor, thus leading to slow sales. Additionally, early Cubes suffered from a manufacturing issue that led to faint lines (referred to as "cracks" or "mold lines") in the acrylic case. This was often considered damaging to the aesthetic quality of the computer.
  

    [2]
   


  After seeing low profits, Apple attempted to increase sales by bundling more software with it, lowering the price of the base model, incorporating a
  
   CD-RW
  
  drive standard for the 500 MHz version, and offering an improved
  
   Nvidia
  
  graphics card as an option. These efforts could not offset the earlier perception of reduced value compared to the iMac and Power Mac G4 lineup. According to an Apple press release on July 3, 2001, production of the Cube stopped indefinitely because of low demand.
  

    [3]
   


  In 2003, the G4 Cube received a brief return to the spotlight after a series of articles in
  

    Wired
   

  charted its cult popularity. The articles, focusing on upgrades installed by individual users and retailers such as Kemplar, led to a sharp rise in the Cube's resale value. Nevertheless, with the release of the relatively inexpensive
  
   Mac Mini
  
  (seen by some
  

    [4]
   

  as a replacement), coupled with Apple's switch to G5 processors and eventually Intel Core-based processors, the Cube again faded into the background.
 
  Since the Cube's demise, a number of Cube enthusiasts have made modifications to their machines. Some of the more popular upgrades are high-performance video cards (
  
   duct tape
  
  may be used to allow the GPU fan to work correctly in the small Cube case) and third-party CPU upgrade cards (up to 1.8 GHz); a few people have even modified their Cubes to take a dual-processor upgrade. A popular upgrade is the
  
   GeForce2 MX
  
  , which exists in a version specially created for the Cube.
  
   Case modifications
  
  , such as lighting and extra cooling, are also popular. The Cube uses the same type of memory and hard drive as many other desktop computers, thus making upgrades for the said components popular. Although the Cube uses a fanless, convection-based cooling system, the mounting holes make it possible to install a standard desktop cooling fan.
 
  Following Apple's discontinuation of the Power Mac G4 Cube, several of its products have been released in even smaller sizes while maintaining a similarly shaped, square base.
 
  The
  
   Apple TV
  
  is a
  
   digital media receiver
  
  designed to be bring digital content to your television. Like the Power Mac G4 Cube, the Apple TV has a square base. The first generation's base measured 7.8 inches (20 cm) on both sides, one-tenth of an inch longer than the G4 Cube's 7.7 inches (20 cm), but had a much shorter height of 1.1 inches (2.8 cm) compared to the G4 Cube's. The second- and third-generation Apple TVs were about 75% smaller than the first-generation model.
 
  Apple released the first
  
   Mac Mini
  
  on January 22, 2005, nearly three-and-a-half years after the G4 Cube was discontinued. Rather than being a mid-range computer, the Mini was typically sold as a low-end consumer model for use as a desktop, although a server model existed for the late-2009, mid-2010, mid-2011 and late-2012 models.
 
  The Mac Mini had a square base, just like the G4 Cube. Models prior to mid-2010 had a base which was noticeably smaller than the G4 Cube's. The smaller machines also had a shorter height of 2.0 inches (5.1 cm). Mac Mini models released since mid-2010 had a larger square base, matching that of the G4 Cube.
 
  In 2013, Apple announced a redesigned version of the
  
   Mac Pro
  
  with dimensions similar to that of the G4 Cube. The new Mac Pro is a cylinder 9.9 inches (25 cm) high and 6.6 inches (17 cm) in diameter.
 
  The Cube can be found in many publications related to design and some technology museums. In addition, the computer has been featured in other forms of media. The G4 Cube was used as a
  
   prop
  
  on shows such as
  

    Absolutely Fabulous
   

  ,
  

    The Drew Carey Show
   

  ,
  

    Curb Your Enthusiasm
   

  ,
  

    Dark Angel
   

  ,
  

    The Gilmore Girls
   

  and
  

    24
   

  . The computer was parodied in
  

    The Simpsons
   

  episode "
  
   Mypods and Boomsticks
  
  ." The Cube is also seen in films such as
  

    Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back
   

  ,
  

    40 Days and 40 Nights
   

  ,
  

    About a Boy
   

  ,
  

    August
   

  and
  

    The Royal Tenenbaums
   

  . In
  
   William Gibson
  
  's 2003 novel
  

    Pattern Recognition
   

  , the character Cayce uses her film producer friend's Cube while staying in his London flat. In the movie "Big Fat Liar," a G4 Cube and a Studio Display can be seen in the background of Wolf's kitchen.
 
  Sixteen Cubes were used to power the displays of the computer consoles in
  

    Star Trek: Enterprise
   

  .
  

    [5]
   


  The G4 Cube and its peripherals were showcased at
  
   The Museum of Modern Art
  
  ,
  

    [6]
   



    [7]
   

  and at the Digital Design Museum (a division of
  
   Design Museum
  
  ).
  

    [8]
   


  G4 Cubes are also a popular candidate for "
  
   Macquariums
  
  "—fish tanks made from the chassis of Apple computers.
 