

  A
  
   touchpad
  
  or trackpad is a pointing device featuring a tactile sensor, a specialized surface that can translate the motion and position of a user's fingers to a relative position on the operating system that is made output to the screen. Touchpads are a common feature of
  
   laptop computers
  
  , and are also used as a substitute for a
  
   mouse
  
  where desk space is scarce. Because they vary in size, they can also be found on
  
   personal digital assistants
  
  (PDAs) and some
  
   portable media players
  
  . Wireless touchpads are also available as detached accessories.
 


  Touchpads operate in one of several ways, including
  
   capacitive sensing
  
  and
  
   resistive touchscreen
  
  . The most common technology used as of 2010
  

    [update]
   

  entails sensing the capacitive
  
   virtual ground
  
  effect of a finger, or the capacitance between
  
   sensors
  
  . Capacitance-based touchpads will not sense the tip of a pencil or other similar implement. Gloved fingers may also be problematic.
 
  While touchpads, like touchscreens, are able to sense absolute position, resolution is limited by their size. For common use as a pointer device, the dragging motion of a finger is translated into a finer, relative motion of the cursor on the output to the display on the operating system, analogous to the handling of a
  
   mouse
  
  that is lifted and put back on a surface. Hardware buttons equivalent to a standard mouse's left and right buttons are positioned below, above, or beside the touchpad.
 
  Some touchpads and associated
  
   device driver
  
  software may interpret tapping the pad as a click, and a tap followed by a continuous pointing motion (a "click-and-a-half") can indicate dragging.
  

    [1]
   

  Tactile touchpads allow for clicking and dragging by incorporating button functionality into the surface of the touchpad itself.
  

    [2]
   



    [3]
   

  To select, one presses down on the touchpad instead of a physical button. To drag, instead performing the "click-and-a-half" technique, one presses down while on the object, drags without releasing pressure and lets go when done. Touchpad drivers can also allow the use of multiple fingers to facilitate the other mouse buttons (commonly two-finger tapping for the center button).
 
  Some touchpads have "hotspots", locations on the touchpad used for functionality beyond a mouse. For example, on certain touchpads, moving the finger along an edge of the touch pad will act as a
  
   scroll wheel
  
  , controlling the
  
   scrollbar
  
  and scrolling the
  
   window
  
  that has the
  
   focus
  
  vertically or horizontally. Many touchpads use two-finger dragging for
  
   scrolling
  
  . Also, some touchpad drivers support tap zones, regions where a tap will execute a function, for example, pausing a media player or launching an
  
   application
  
  . All of these functions are implemented in the touchpad
  
   device driver
  
  software, and can be disabled.
 
  By 1982
  
   Apollo
  
  desktop computers were equipped with a touchpad on the right side of the keyboard.
  

    [4]
   

  Introduced a year later, the
  
   Gavilan SC
  
  included a touchpad above its keyboard.
 
  A touchpad was first developed for
  
   Psion
  
  's MC 200/400/600/WORD Series in 1989.
  

    [5]
   


   Olivetti
  
  and
  
   Triumph-Adler
  
  introduced the first laptops with touchpad in 1992.
  

    [6]
   


   Cirque
  
  introduced the first widely available touchpad, branded as GlidePoint, in 1994.
  

    [7]
   


   Apple Inc
  
  introduced touchpads to the modern laptop in the PowerBook series in 1994, using Cirque’s GlidePoint technology;
  

    [8]
   

  later PowerBooks and MacBooks would use Apple-developed trackpads. Another early adopter of the GlidePoint pointing device was Sharp.
  

    [7]
   

  Later,
  
   Synaptics
  
  introduced their touchpad into the marketplace, branded the TouchPad.
  
   Epson
  
  was an early adopter of this product.
  

    [7]
   


  As touchpads began to be introduced in laptops in the 1990s, there was often confusion as to what the product should be called. No consistent term was used, and references varied, such as: glidepoint, touch sensitive input device, touchpad, trackpad, and pointing device.
  

    [9]
   



    [10]
   



    [11]
   


  Users were often presented the option to purchase a
  
   pointing stick
  
  , touchpad, or
  
   trackball
  
  . Combinations of the devices were common, though touchpads and trackballs were rarely included together.
  

    [12]
   


  Touchpads are primarily used in self-contained portable
  
   laptop
  
  computers and do not require a flat surface near the machine. The touchpad is close to the keyboard, and only very short finger movements are required to move the cursor across the display screen; while advantageous, this also makes it possible for a user's palm or wrist to move the mouse cursor accidentally while typing. Touchpads also exist for desktop computers as an external peripheral, albeit rarely seen. Touchpads are sometimes integrated in some desktop computer keyboards, particularly keyboards oriented for
  
   HTPC
  
  use.
 
  One-dimensional touchpads are the primary control interface for menu navigation on second-generation and later
  
   iPod Classic
  
  portable music players, where they are referred to as "click wheels", since they only sense motion along one axis, which is wrapped around like a wheel.
  
   Creative Labs
  
  also uses a touchpad for their
  
   Zen
  
  line of
  
   MP3 players
  
  , beginning with the Zen Touch. The second-generation
  
   Microsoft
  

   Zune
  
  product line (the
  
   Zune 80/120
  
  and
  
   Zune 4/8
  
  ) uses touch for the
  
   Zune Pad
  
  .
 
  Apple's
  
   PowerBook 500
  
  series was its first laptop to carry such a device,
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  which Apple refers to as a "trackpad". When introduced in May 1994 it replaced the
  
   trackball
  
  of previous
  
   PowerBook
  
  models. In late 2008 Apple's revisions of the
  
   MacBook
  
  and
  
   MacBook Pro
  
  incorporated a "Tactile Touchpad" design with button functionality incorporated into the tracking surface.
  

    [2]
   



    [3]
   



    [13]
   

  Beginning in the second generation of MacBook Pro, the entire touchpad surface acts as a clickable button.
  

    [14]
   


  Laptops today feature multitouch touchpads that can sense in some cases up to five fingers simultaneously, providing more options for input, such as the ability to bring up the
  
   context menu
  
  by tapping two fingers, dragging two fingers for scrolling, or gestures for zoom in/out or rotate.
 

   Psion
  
  's MC 200/400/600/WORD Series,
  

    [5]
   

  introduced in 1989, came with a new mouse-replacing input device similar to a touchpad,
  

    [15]
   

  although more closely resembling a
  
   graphics tablet
  
  , as the cursor was positioned by clicking on a specific point on the pad, instead of moving it in the direction of a stroke.
 
  There are two principal means by which touchpads work.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  In the
  
   matrix approach
  
  , a series of
  
   conductors
  
  are arranged in an array of parallel lines in two layers, separated by an
  
   insulator
  
  and crossing each other at
  
   right angles
  
  to form a grid. A high frequency signal is applied sequentially between pairs in this two-dimensional grid array. The current that passes between the nodes is proportional to the
  
   capacitance
  
  . When a
  
   virtual ground
  
  , such as a finger, is placed over one of the intersections between the conductive layer some of the electrical field is
  
   shunted
  
  to this ground point, resulting in a change in the apparent capacitance at that location. This method received
  

    U.S. Patent 5,305,017
   

  awarded to George Gerpheide in April 1994.
 
  The
  
   capacitive shunt method
  
  , described in an application note by
  
   Analog Devices
  
  ,
  

    [16]
   

  senses the change in
  
   capacitance
  
  between a transmitter and receiver that are on opposite sides of the sensor. The transmitter creates an electric field which oscillates at 200–300 kHz. If a ground point, such as the finger, is placed between the transmitter and receiver, some of the field lines are shunted away, decreasing the apparent capacitance.
 
  Major manufacturers include:
 