

  A
  
   web search engine
  
  is a software system that is designed to search for information on the World Wide Web. The search results are generally presented in a line of results often referred to as
  
   search engine results pages
  
  (SERPs). The information may be a mix of
  
   web pages
  
  , images, and other types of files. Some search engines also
  
   mine data
  
  available in
  
   databases
  
  or
  
   open directories
  
  . Unlike
  
   web directories
  
  , which are maintained only by human editors, search engines also maintain
  
   real-time
  
  information by running an
  
   algorithm
  
  on a
  
   web crawler
  
  .
 


  Internet search engines themselves predate the debut of the Web in December 1990. The
  
   Who is
  
  user search dates back to 1982
  

    [1]
   

  and the
  
   Knowbot Information Service
  
  multi-network user search was first implemented in 1989.
  

    [2]
   

  The first well documented search engine that searched content files, namely
  
   FTP
  
  files was Archie, which debuted on 10 September 1990.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  Prior to September 1993 the World Wide Web was entirely indexed by hand. There was a list of
  
   webservers
  
  edited by
  
   Tim Berners-Lee
  
  and hosted on the
  
   CERN
  
  webserver. One historical snapshot of the list in 1992 remains,
  

    [3]
   

  but as more and more web servers went online the central list could no longer keep up. On the
  
   NCSA
  
  site, new servers were announced under the title "What's New!"
  

    [4]
   


  The first tool used for searching content (as opposed to users) on the
  
   Internet
  
  was
  
   Archie
  
  .
  

    [5]
   

  The name stands for "archive" without the "v". It was created by
  
   Alan Emtage
  
  , Bill Heelan and J. Peter Deutsch, computer science students at
  
   McGill University
  
  in
  
   Montreal
  
  . The program downloaded the directory listings of all the files located on public anonymous FTP (
  
   File Transfer Protocol
  
  ) sites, creating a searchable database of file names; however,
  
   Archie Search Engine
  
  did not index the contents of these sites since the amount of data was so limited it could be readily searched manually.
 
  The rise of
  
   Gopher
  
  (created in 1991 by
  
   Mark McCahill
  
  at the
  
   University of Minnesota
  
  ) led to two new search programs,
  
   Veronica
  
  and
  
   Jughead
  
  . Like Archie, they searched the file names and titles stored in Gopher index systems. Veronica (
  
   V
  
  ery
  
   E
  
  asy
  
   R
  
  odent-
  
   O
  
  riented
  
   N
  
  et-wide
  
   I
  
  ndex to
  
   C
  
  omputerized
  
   A
  
  rchives) provided a keyword search of most Gopher menu titles in the entire Gopher listings. Jughead (
  
   J
  
  onzy's
  
   U
  
  niversal
  
   G
  
  opher
  
   H
  
  ierarchy
  
   E
  
  xcavation
  
   A
  
  nd
  
   D
  
  isplay) was a tool for obtaining menu information from specific Gopher servers. While the name of the search engine "
  
   Archie Search Engine
  
  " was not a reference to the
  
   Archie comic book
  
  series, "
  
   Veronica
  
  " and "
  
   Jughead
  
  " are characters in the series, thus referencing their predecessor.
 
  In the summer of 1993, no search engine existed for the web, though numerous specialized catalogues were maintained by hand.
  
   Oscar Nierstrasz
  
  at the
  
   University of Geneva
  
  wrote a series of
  
   Perl
  
  scripts that periodically mirrored these pages and rewrote them into a standard format. This formed the basis for
  
   W3Catalog
  
  , the web's first primitive search engine, released on September 2, 1993.
  

    [6]
   


  In June 1993, Matthew Gray, then at
  
   MIT
  
  , produced what was probably the first
  
   web robot
  
  , the
  
   Perl
  
  -based
  
   World Wide Web Wanderer
  
  , and used it to generate an index called 'Wandex'. The purpose of the Wanderer was to measure the size of the World Wide Web, which it did until late 1995. The web's second search engine
  
   Aliweb
  
  appeared in November 1993. Aliweb did not use a
  
   web robot
  
  , but instead depended on being notified by website administrators of the existence at each site of an index file in a particular format.
 

   NCSA's Mosaic™
  
  -
  
   Mosaic (web browser)
  
  wasn't the first Web browser. But it was the first to make a major splash. In November 1993, Mosaic v 1.0 broke away from the small pack of existing browsers by including features—like icons, bookmarks, a more attractive interface, and pictures—that made the software easy to use and appealing to "non-geeks."
 

   JumpStation
  
  (created in December 1993
  

    [7]
   

  by
  
   Jonathon Fletcher
  
  ) used a
  
   web robot
  
  to find web pages and to build its index, and used a
  
   web form
  
  as the interface to its query program. It was thus the first WWW resource-discovery tool to combine the three essential features of a web search engine (crawling, indexing, and searching) as described below. Because of the limited resources available on the platform it ran on, its indexing and hence searching were limited to the titles and headings found in the web pages the crawler encountered.
 
  One of the first "all text" crawler-based search engines was
  
   WebCrawler
  
  , which came out in 1994. Unlike its predecessors, it allowed users to search for any word in any webpage, which has become the standard for all major search engines since. It was also the first one widely known by the public. Also in 1994,
  
   Lycos
  
  (which started at
  
   Carnegie Mellon University
  
  ) was launched and became a major commercial endeavor.
 
  Soon after, many search engines appeared and vied for popularity. These included
  
   Magellan
  
  ,
  
   Excite
  
  ,
  
   Infoseek
  
  ,
  
   Inktomi
  
  ,
  
   Northern Light
  
  , and
  
   AltaVista
  
  .
  
   Yahoo!
  
  was among the most popular ways for people to find web pages of interest, but its search function operated on its
  
   web directory
  
  , rather than its full-text copies of web pages. Information seekers could also browse the directory instead of doing a keyword-based search.
 
  In 1996,
  
   Netscape
  
  was looking to give a single search engine an exclusive deal as the featured search engine on Netscape's web browser. There was so much interest that instead Netscape struck deals with five of the major search engines: for $5 million a year, each search engine would be in rotation on the Netscape search engine page. The five engines were Yahoo!, Magellan, Lycos, Infoseek, and Excite.
  

    [8]
   



    [9]
   



   Google
  
  adopted the idea of selling search terms in 1998, from a small search engine company named
  
   goto.com
  
  . This move had a significant effect on the SE business, which went from struggling to one of the most profitable businesses in the internet.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  Search engines were also known as some of the brightest stars in the Internet investing frenzy that occurred in the late 1990s.
  

    [10]
   

  Several companies entered the market spectacularly, receiving record gains during their
  
   initial public offerings
  
  . Some have taken down their public search engine, and are marketing enterprise-only editions, such as Northern Light. Many search engine companies were caught up in the
  
   dot-com bubble
  
  , a speculation-driven market boom that peaked in 1999 and ended in 2001.
 
  Around 2000,
  
   Google's search engine
  
  rose to prominence.
  

    [11]
   

  The company achieved better results for many searches with an innovation called
  
   PageRank
  
  , as was explained in the paper
  
   Anatomy of a Search Engine
  
  written by
  
   Sergey Brin
  
  and
  
   Larry Page
  
  , the later founders of Google.
  

    [12]
   

  This
  
   iterative algorithm
  
  ranks web pages based on the number and PageRank of other web sites and pages that link there, on the premise that good or desirable pages are linked to more than others. Google also maintained a minimalist interface to its search engine. In contrast, many of its competitors embedded a search engine in a
  
   web portal
  
  . In fact, Google search engine became so popular that spoof engines emerged such as
  
   Mystery Seeker
  
  .
 
  By 2000,
  
   Yahoo!
  
  was providing search services based on Inktomi's search engine. Yahoo! acquired Inktomi in 2002, and
  
   Overture
  
  (which owned
  
   AlltheWeb
  
  and AltaVista) in 2003. Yahoo! switched to Google's search engine until 2004, when it launched its own search engine based on the combined technologies of its acquisitions.
 

   Microsoft
  
  first launched MSN Search in the fall of 1998 using search results from Inktomi. In early 1999 the site began to display listings from
  
   Looksmart
  
  , blended with results from Inktomi. For a short time in 1999, MSN Search used results from AltaVista instead. In 2004,
  
   Microsoft
  
  began a transition to its own search technology, powered by its own
  
   web crawler
  
  (called
  
   msnbot
  
  ).
 
  Microsoft's rebranded search engine,
  
   Bing
  
  , was launched on June 1, 2009. On July 29, 2009, Yahoo! and Microsoft finalized a deal in which
  
   Yahoo! Search
  
  would be powered by Microsoft Bing technology.
 


  A search engine maintains the following processes in near real time:
 
  Web search engines get their information by
  
   web crawling
  
  from site to site. The "spider" checks for the standard filename
  

    robots.txt
   

  , addressed to it, before sending certain information back to be
  
   indexed
  
  depending on many factors, such as the titles, page content,
  
   JavaScript
  
  ,
  
   Cascading Style Sheets
  
  (CSS), headings, as evidenced by the standard
  
   HTML
  
  markup of the informational content, or its metadata in HTML
  
   meta tags
  
  .
 
  Indexing means associating words and other definable tokens found on web pages to their domain names and HTML-based fields. The associations are made in a public database, made available for web search queries. A query from a user can be a single word. The index helps find information relating to the query as quickly as possible.
  

    [13]
   


  Some of the techniques for indexing, and
  
   caching
  
  are trade secrets, whereas web crawling is a straightforward process of visiting all sites on a systematic basis.
 
  Between visits by the
  
   spider
  
  , the cached version of page (some or all the content needed to render it) stored in the search engine working memory is quickly sent to an inquirer. If a visit is overdue, the search engine can just act as a
  
   web proxy
  
  instead. In this case the page may differ from the search terms indexed.
  

    [13]
   

  The cached page holds the appearance of the version whose words were indexed, so a cached version of a page can be useful to the web site when the actual page has been lost, but this problem is also considered a mild form of
  
   linkrot
  
  .
 
  Typically when a user enters a
  
   query
  
  into a search engine it is a few
  
   keywords
  
  .
  

    [14]
   

  The
  
   index
  
  already has the names of the sites containing the keywords, and these are instantly obtained from the index. The real processing load is in generating the web pages that are the search results list: Every page in the entire list must be
  
   weighted
  
  according to information in the indexes.
  

    [13]
   

  Then the top search result item requires the lookup, reconstruction, and markup of the
  
   snippets
  
  showing the context of the keywords matched. These are only part of the processing each search results web page requires, and further pages (next to the top) require more of this post processing.
 
  Beyond simple keyword lookups, search engines offer their own GUI- or command-driven operators and search parameters to refine the search results. These provide the necessary controls for the user engaged in the feedback loop users create by
  
   filtering
  
  and
  
   weighting
  
  while refining the search results, given the initial pages of the first search results. For example, from 2007 the Google.com search engine has allowed one to
  
   filter
  
  by date by clicking "Show search tools" in the leftmost column of the initial search results page, and then selecting the desired date range.
  

    [15]
   

  It's also possible to
  
   weight
  
  by date because each page has a modification time. Most search engines support the use of the
  
   boolean operators
  
  AND, OR and NOT to help end users refine the
  
   search query
  
  . Boolean operators are for literal searches that allow the user to refine and extend the terms of the search. The engine looks for the words or phrases exactly as entered. Some search engines provide an advanced feature called
  
   proximity search
  
  , which allows users to define the distance between keywords.
  

    [13]
   

  There is also
  
   concept-based searching
  
  where the research involves using statistical analysis on pages containing the words or phrases you search for. As well, natural language queries allow the user to type a question in the same form one would ask it to a human.
  

    [16]
   

  A site like this would be ask.com.
  

    [17]
   


  The usefulness of a search engine depends on the
  
   relevance
  
  of the
  
   result set
  
  it gives back. While there may be millions of web pages that include a particular word or phrase, some pages may be more relevant, popular, or authoritative than others. Most search engines employ methods to
  
   rank
  
  the results to provide the "best" results first. How a search engine decides which pages are the best matches, and what order the results should be shown in, varies widely from one engine to another.
  

    [13]
   

  The methods also change over time as Internet usage changes and new techniques evolve. There are two main types of search engine that have evolved: one is a system of predefined and hierarchically ordered keywords that humans have programmed extensively. The other is a system that generates an "
  
   inverted index
  
  " by analyzing texts it locates. This first form relies much more heavily on the computer itself to do the bulk of the work.
 
  Most Web search engines are commercial ventures supported by
  
   advertising
  
  revenue and thus some of them allow advertisers to
  
   have their listings ranked higher
  
  in search results for a fee. Search engines that do not accept money for their search results make money by running
  
   search related ads
  
  alongside the regular search engine results. The search engines make money every time someone clicks on one of these ads.
  

    [18]
   



   Google
  
  is the world's most popular search engine, with a marketshare of 80.52 percent as of March, 2017.
  

    [19]
   


  The world's most popular search engines (with >1% market share) are:
 
  In some East Asian countries and Russia, Google is not the most popular search engine since its algorithm searching has regional filtering, and hides most results.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  


   Yandex
  
  commands a marketshare of 61.9 percent in Russia, compared to Google's 28.3 percent.
  

    [20]
   

  In China, Baidu is the most popular search engine.
  

    [21]
   

  South Korea's homegrown search portal,
  
   Naver
  
  , is used for 70 percent of online searches in the country.
  

    [22]
   


   Yahoo! Japan
  
  and
  
   Yahoo! Taiwan
  
  are the most popular avenues for internet search in Japan and Taiwan, respectively.
  

    [23]
   


  Although search engines are programmed to rank websites based on some combination of their popularity and relevancy, empirical studies indicate various political, economic, and social biases in the information they provide
  

    [24]
   



    [25]
   

  and the underlying assumptions about the technology.
  

    [26]
   

  These biases can be a direct result of economic and commercial processes (e.g., companies that advertise with a search engine can become also more popular in its
  
   organic search
  
  results), and political processes (e.g., the removal of search results to comply with local laws).
  

    [27]
   

  For example, Google will not surface certain Neo-Nazi websites in France and Germany, where Holocaust denial is illegal.
 
  Biases can also be a result of social processes, as search engine algorithms are frequently designed to exclude non-normative viewpoints in favor of more "popular" results.
  

    [28]
   

  Indexing algorithms of major search engines skew towards coverage of U.S.-based sites, rather than websites from non-U.S. countries.
  

    [25]
   



   Google Bombing
  
  is one example of an attempt to manipulate search results for political, social or commercial reasons.
 
  Several scholars have studied the cultural changes triggered by search engines,
  

    [29]
   

  and the representation of certain controversial topics in their results, such as
  
   terrorism in Ireland
  


    [30]
   

  and
  
   conspiracy theories
  
  .
  

    [31]
   


  Many search engines such as Google and Bing provide customized results based on the user's activity history. This leads to an effect that has been called a
  
   filter bubble
  
  . The term describes a phenomenon in which websites use
  
   algorithms
  
  to selectively guess what information a user would like to see, based on information about the user (such as location, past click behaviour and search history). As a result, websites tend to show only information that agrees with the user's past viewpoint, effectively isolating the user in a bubble that tends to exclude contrary information. Prime examples are Google's personalized search results and
  
   Facebook
  
  's personalized news stream. According to
  
   Eli Pariser
  
  , who coined the term, users get less exposure to conflicting viewpoints and are isolated intellectually in their own informational bubble. Pariser related an example in which one user searched Google for "BP" and got investment news about
  
   British Petroleum
  
  while another searcher got information about the
  
   Deepwater Horizon oil spill
  
  and that the two search results pages were "strikingly different".
  

    [32]
   



    [33]
   



    [34]
   

  The bubble effect may have negative implications for civic discourse, according to Pariser.
  

    [35]
   

  Since this problem has been identified, competing search engines have emerged that seek to avoid this problem by not tracking or "bubbling" users, such as
  
   DuckDuckGo
  
  . Other scholars do not share Pariser's view, finding the evidence in support of his thesis unconvincing.
  

    [36]
   


  The global growth of the Internet and electronic media in the
  
   Arab
  
  and
  
   Muslim
  
  World during the last decade has encouraged Islamic adherents in
  
   the Middle East
  
  and
  
   Asian sub-continent
  
  , to attempt their own search engines, their own filtered search portals that would enable users to perform
  
   safe searches
  
  .
 
  More than usual
  
   safe search
  
  filters, these Islamic web portals categorizing websites into being either "
  
   halal
  
  " or "
  
   haram
  
  ", based on modern, expert, interpretation of
  
   the "Law of Islam"
  
  .
 

   ImHalal
  
  came online in September 2011.
  
   Halalgoogling
  
  came online in July 2013. These use
  
   haram
  
  filters on the collections from
  
   Google
  
  and
  
   Bing
  
  (and other).
  

    [37]
   


  While lack of investment and slow pace in technologies in the Muslim World has hindered progress and thwarted success of an Islamic search engine, targeting as the main consumers Islamic adherents, projects like
  
   Muxlim
  
  , a Muslim lifestyle site, did receive millions of dollars from investors like Rite Internet Ventures, and it also faltered.
 
  Other religion-oriented search engines are Jewgle, the Jewish version of Google, and SeekFind.org, which is Christian. SeekFind filters sites that attack or degrade their faith.
  

    [38]
   


  Search engine submission is a process in which a webmaster submits a website directly to a search engine. While search engine submission is sometimes presented as a way to promote a website, it generally is not necessary because the major search engines use web crawlers, that will eventually find most web sites on the Internet without assistance. They can either submit one web page at a time, or they can submit the entire site using a
  
   sitemap
  
  , but it is normally only necessary to submit the
  
   home page
  
  of a web site as search engines are able to crawl a well designed website. There are two remaining reasons to submit a web site or web page to a search engine: to add an entirely new web site without waiting for a search engine to discover it, and to have a web site's record updated after a substantial redesign.
 
  Some search engine submission software not only submits websites to multiple search engines, but also add links to websites from their own pages. This could appear helpful in increasing a website's ranking, because external links are one of the most important factors determining a website's ranking. However John Mueller of
  
   Google
  
  has stated that this "can lead to a tremendous number of unnatural links for your site" with a negative impact on site ranking.
  

    [39]
   

