


   Google AdSense
  
  is a program run by
  
   Google
  
  that allows publishers in the
  
   Google Network of content sites
  
  to serve automatic text, image, video, or interactive media advertisements, that are targeted to site content and audience. These advertisements are administered, sorted, and maintained by Google. They can generate revenue on either a
  
   per-click
  
  or
  
   per-impression
  
  basis. Google
  
   beta-tested
  
  a
  
   cost-per-action
  
  service, but discontinued it in October 2008 in favor of a
  
   DoubleClick
  
  offering (also owned by Google).
  

    [2]
   

  In Q1 2014, Google earned US $3.4 billion ($13.6 billion annualized), or 22% of total revenue, through Google AdSense.
  

    [3]
   

  AdSense is a participant in the
  
   AdChoices
  
  program, so AdSense ads typically include the triangle-shaped
  
   AdChoices
  
  icon.
  

    [4]
   



    [5]
   

  This program also operates on
  
   HTTP cookies
  
  . Over 14 million websites are using AdSense.
  

    [6]
   




  Google uses its technology to serve
  
   advertisements
  
  based on website content, the user's geographical location, and other factors. Those wanting to advertise with Google's targeted advertisement system may enroll through Google
  
   AdWords
  
  . AdSense has become one of the popular programs that specializes in creating and placing banner advertisements on a website or blog, because the advertisements are less intrusive and the content of the advertisements is often relevant to the website. Many websites use AdSense to make revenue from their web content (website, online videos, online audio content, etc.), and it is the most popular advertising network.
  

    [7]
   

  AdSense has been particularly important for delivering advertising revenue to small websites that do not have the resources for developing advertising sales programs and salespeople to seek out advertisers. To display contextually relevant advertisements on a website, webmasters place a brief Javascript code on the website's pages. Websites that are content-rich have been very successful with this advertising program, as noted in a number of publisher case studies on the AdSense website. Google has removed the policy of limiting AdSense ads to three ads per page. Now, Adsense publishers can place unlimited amount of AdSense ads on a page.
 
  Some webmasters put significant effort into maximizing their own AdSense income. They do this in three ways:
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  The source of all AdSense income is the AdWords program, which in turn has a complex pricing model based on a
  
   Vickrey
  
  second price auction. AdSense commands an advertiser to submit a sealed bid (i.e., a bid not observable by competitors). Additionally, for any given click received, advertisers only pay one bid increment above the second-highest bid. Google currently shares 68% of revenue generated by AdSense with content network partners, and 51% of revenue generated by AdSense with AdSense for Search partners.
  

    [8]
   

  On June 18, 2015, Google announced rebranding of AdSense with a new logo.
  

    [9]
   


  Google launched its AdSense program, originally named content targeting advertising in March 2003.
  

    [10]
   

  The AdSense name was originally used by Applied Semantics, a competitive offering to AdSense. The name was adopted by Google after Google acquired Applied Semantics in April 2003.
  

    [11]
   

  Some advertisers complained that AdSense yielded worse results than
  
   AdWords
  
  , since it served ads that related contextually to the content on a web page and that content was less likely to be related to a user's commercial desires than search results. For example, someone browsing a blog dedicated to flowers was less likely to be interested in ordering flowers than someone searching for terms related to flowers. As a result, in 2004 Google allowed its advertisers to opt out of the AdSense network.
  

    [12]
   



   Paul Buchheit
  
  , the founder of
  
   Gmail
  
  , had the idea to run ads within Google's e-mail service. But he and others say it was
  
   Susan Wojcicki
  
  , with the backing of
  
   Sergey Brin
  
  , who organized the team that adapted that idea into an enormously successful product.
  

    [13]
   

  By early 2005 AdSense accounted for an estimated 15 percent of Google's total revenues.
  

    [12]
   

  In 2009, Google AdSense announced that it would now be offering new features, including the ability to "enable multiple networks to display ads". In February 2010, Google AdSense started using search history in contextual matching to offer more relevant ads.
  

    [14]
   

  On January 21, 2014, Google AdSense launched Direct Campaigns, a tool where publishers may directly sell ads. This feature was retired on February 10, 2015.
 
  The content-based advertisements can be targeted for users with certain interest or contexts. The targeting can be CPC ("per click") or CPM (per impression) based, the only significant difference in CPC and CPM is that with CPC targeting, earnings are based on clicks while CPM earnings recently are actually based not just per views/impression but on a larger scale, per thousand impression, therefore driving it from the market, which makes CPC ads more common. There are various ad sizes available for content ads. The ads can be simple text, image, animated image,
  
   flash video
  
  , video, or
  
   rich media
  
  ads. At most ad sizes, users can change whether to show both text and multimedia ads or just one of them. As of November 2012
  

    [update]
   

  , a grey arrow appears beneath AdSense text ads for easier identification. Google made a policy update regarding the number of ads per page, the three ads per page limit has been removed.
  

    [15]
   


  Page-level ads
  

    [16]
   

  are a family of ad formats that offer a new and innovative way for you to monetize your content. With Page-level ads, you place the same piece of ad code once on each page that you want to show the ads.
 
  AdSense for search allows publisher to display ads relating to search terms on their site and receive 51% of the revenue generated from those ads.
  

    [8]
   

  AdSense custom search ads can be displayed either alongside the results from an AdSense Custom Search Engine or alongside internal search results through the use of Custom Search Ads. Custom Search Ads are only available to "
  
   white-listed
  
  " publishers. Although the revenue share from AdSense for Search (51%) is lower than from AdSense for Content (68%) higher returns can be achieved due to the potential for higher Click Through Rates.
 
  AdSense for video allows publishers with video content (e.g., video hosting websites) to generate revenue using ad placements from Google's extensive
  
   advertising network
  
  . The publisher is able to decide what type of ads are shown with their video inventory. Formats available include linear video ads (pre-roll or post-roll), overlay ads that display AdSense text and display ads over the video content, and the TrueView format.
  

    [17]
   

  Publishers can also display companion ads - display ads that run alongside video content outside the player. AdSense for video is for publishers running video content within a player and not for
  
   YouTube
  
  publishers.
 
  Link units are closely targeted to the interests of your users. Because users directly interact with the ad unit, they may be more interested in the ads they eventually see.
 
  AdSense publishers are paid for clicks on the ads that are linked from link unit topics, not for clicks on the initial topics themselves. The ads on the linked page are pay-per-click Google ads similar to those shown in regular AdSense ad units.
  
   Link Units
  

  AdSense for mobile content allowed publishers to generate earnings from their
  
   mobile websites
  
  using targeted Google advertisements. Just like AdSense for content, Google matches advertisements to the content of a website — in this case, a mobile website. Instead of traditional JavaScript code, technologies such as Java and Objective-C are used. As of February 2012, AdSense for Mobile Content was rolled into the core AdSense for Content offering to better reflect the lessening separation between desktop and mobile content.
  

    [18]
   


  AdSense for domains allows advertisements to be placed on domain names that have not been developed. This offers domain name owners a way to monetize (make money from) domain names that are otherwise dormant or not in use. AdSense for domains is currently being offered to all AdSense publishers, but it wasn't always available to all. On December 12, 2008,
  

    TechCrunch
   

  reported that AdSense for Domains is available for all US publishers.
  

    [19]
   

  On February 22, 2012, Google announced that it was shutting down its Hosted AdSense for Domains program.
  

    [20]
   


  In May 2005, Google announced a limited-participation beta version of
  
   AdSense for Feeds
  
  , a version of AdSense that runs on
  
   RSS
  
  and
  
   Atom
  

   feeds
  
  that have more than 100 active subscribers. According to the Official Google Blog, "advertisers have their ads placed in the most appropriate feed articles; publishers are paid for their original content; readers see relevant advertising—and in the long run, more quality feeds to choose from."
  

    [21]
   

  AdSense for Feeds works by inserting images into a feed. When the image is displayed by a RSS reader or Web browser, Google writes the advertising content into the image that it returns. The advertisement content is chosen based on the content of the feed surrounding the image. When the user clicks the image, he or she is redirected to the advertiser's website in the same way as regular AdSense advertisements. AdSense for Feeds remained in its beta state until August 15, 2008, when it became available to all AdSense users. On December 3, 2012, Google discontinued AdSense For Feeds program.
  

    [22]
   


  Some
  
   webmasters
  
  create websites tailored to lure searchers from Google and other engines onto their AdSense website to make money from clicks. Such websites often contain nothing but a large amount of interconnected, automated content (e.g., a directory with content from the
  
   Open Directory Project
  
  , or
  
   "scraper" websites
  
  relying on RSS feeds for content). Possibly the most popular form of such "AdSense farms" are
  
   splogs
  
  (
  
   spam
  
  blogs), which are poorly written content centered around known high-paying keywords. Many of these websites reuse content from other websites, such as
  
   Wikipedia
  
  , to attract visitors. These and related approaches are considered to be
  
   search engine spam
  
  and can be reported to Google.
  

    [27]
   

  A
  
   Made for AdSense
  
  (MFA) website or webpage has little or no content, but is filled with advertisements so that users have no choice but to click on advertisements. Such pages were tolerated in the past, but due to complaints, Google now disables such accounts. There have also been reports of
  
   Trojan horses
  
  engineered to produce counterfeit Google advertisements that are formatted looking like legitimate ones. The Trojan uploads itself onto an unsuspecting user's computer through a webpage and then replaces the original advertisements with its own set of malicious advertisements.
  

    [28]
   


  Many website owners complain that their AdSense accounts have been disabled just before they were supposed to receive their first paycheck from Google.
  

    [29]
   

  Google claims accounts have been disabled due to click fraud or forbidden content, but have offered no proof of this.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  An automated email is sent to the publisher's owner which contains a link to file an appeal.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  In the email, Google states that "Because we have a responsibility to protect our AdWords advertisers from inflated costs due to invalid activity, we've found it necessary to disable your AdSense account. Your outstanding balance and Google's share of the revenue will both be fully refunded back to the affected advertisers."
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  The revenue generated - whether legitimate or not - is taken, and all complaints are deferred.
  

    [30]
   


   [
   


      not in citation given
     


   ]
  
  In May 2014, Hagens Berman law firm filed a national class-action lawsuit against Google, claiming the company unlawfully denies payments to thousands of website owners and operators who place ads on their sites sold through Google AdWords.
  

    [31]
   


  There were numerous complaints in online discussion forums about a difference in treatment for publishers from China and India, namely that sites from those locations are required to be active for six months before being eligible for AdSense.
  

    [32]
   



    [33]
   



    [34]
   

  Due to alleged concerns about
  
   click fraud
  
  , Google AdSense has been criticized by some
  
   search engine optimization
  
  firms as a large source of what Google calls "invalid clicks", in which one company clicks on a rival's search engine advertisements to drive up the other company's costs.
  

    [35]
   

  The payment terms for webmasters have also been criticized. Google withholds payment until an account reaches US$100,
  

    [36]
   

  but many micro content providers
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  require a long time—years in some cases—to build up this much AdSense revenue. However, Google will pay all earned revenue greater than US$10 when an AdSense account is closed and not disabled. On the other side Google bills its customers (API users for example) monthly, in increments as low as a few cents.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  Google came under fire when the official Google AdSense Blog showcased the French video website Imineo.com. This website violated Google's AdSense Program Policies
  

    [37]
   

  by displaying AdSense alongside sexually explicit material.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  Typically, websites displaying AdSense have been banned from showing such content.
  

    [38]
   

  Using both AdSense and AdWords may cause a website to pay Google a commission when the website advertises itself.
  

    [39]
   

  In some cases, AdSense displays inappropriate or offensive ads. For example, in a news story about a terrorist attack in
  
   India
  
  , an advert was generated for a (presumably non-existent) educational qualification in terrorism.
  

    [40]
   

  AdSense uses
  
   tracking cookies
  
  that are viewed by some users as a threat to privacy.
  

    [41]
   

  AdSense terms of service require that sites using AdSense explain the use of these cookies in their privacy policy.
  

    [42]
   



