


   Sergey Mikhaylovich Brin
  
  (
  
   Russian
  
  :
  
   Серге́й Миха́йлович Брин
  
  ; born August 21, 1973) is an American
  
   computer scientist
  
  , internet entrepreneur, and philanthropist.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  Together with
  
   Larry Page
  
  , he co-founded
  
   Google
  
  . Brin is the President of Google's parent company
  
   Alphabet Inc
  
  . In October 2016 (the most recent period for which figures are available), Brin was the 12th richest person in the world, with an estimated net worth of
  

    US$
   
   39.2
   

   billion
  
  .
  

    [6]
   


  Brin immigrated to the United States with his family from the Soviet Union at the age of 6. He earned his bachelor's degree at the
  
   University of Maryland
  
  , following in his father's and grandfather's footsteps by studying
  
   mathematics
  
  , as well as computer science. After graduation, he moved to
  
   Stanford University
  
  to acquire a
  
   PhD
  
  in computer science. There he met Page, with whom he later became friends. They crammed their dormitory room with inexpensive computers and applied Brin's
  
   data mining
  
  system to build a
  
   web search engine
  
  . The program became popular at Stanford, and they suspended their PhD studies to start up Google in a rented garage.
 


    The Economist
   

  referred to Brin as an "
  
   Enlightenment
  
  Man", and as someone who believes that "knowledge is always good, and certainly always better than ignorance", a philosophy that is summed up by Google's mission statement, "Organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and useful,"
  

    [7]
   



    [8]
   

  and unofficial yet sometimes controversial motto, "
  
   Don't be evil
  
  ".
  

    [9]
   




  Brin was born in Moscow in the
  
   Soviet Union
  
  , to
  
   Russian Jewish
  
  parents, Yevgenia and Mikhail Brin, both graduates of
  
   Moscow State University
  
  (MSU).
  

    [10]
   



    [11]
   

  His father is a mathematics professor at the
  
   University of Maryland
  
  , and his mother a researcher at
  
   NASA
  
  's
  
   Goddard Space Flight Center
  
  .
  

    [1]
   



    [12]
   



    [13]
   


  In May 1979, when Brin was five years old, his family felt compelled to emigrate out of the Soviet Union.
  

    [14]
   

  In an interview with
  
   Mark Malseed
  
  , co-author of
  

    The Google Story
   

  ,
  

    [15]
   

  Sergey's father explained how he was "forced to abandon his dream of becoming an
  
   astronomer
  
  even before he reached college." He said "
  
   Communist Party
  
  heads barred Jews from upper professional ranks by denying them entry to universities, Jews were excluded from the
  
   physics
  
  department, in particular, at the prestigious
  
   Moscow State University
  
  , because Soviet leaders did not trust them with nuclear rocket research." Mikhail Brin therefore changed his major to mathematics where he received nearly straight A's.
  

    [12]
   

  In another interview with
  
   Dominic Lawson
  
  of
  

    The Independent
   

  , Mikhail said: "No one would consider me for
  
   graduate school
  
  because I was Jewish." He went on to tell Lawson how MSU required Jews to take their entrance exams in different rooms from non-Jewish applicants, and how they were marked on a harsher scale.
  

    [16]
   


  The Brin family lived in a three-room apartment in central Moscow, which they also shared with Sergey's paternal grandmother.
  

    [12]
   

  Brin told Malseed, "I've known for a long time that my father wasn't able to pursue the career he wanted", but Brin only picked up the details years later after they had settled in the United States. In 1977, after his father returned from a mathematics conference in
  
   Warsaw
  
  , Poland, Mikhail Brin announced that it was time for the family to emigrate. "We cannot stay here any more", he told his wife and mother. At the conference, he was able to "mingle freely with colleagues from the United States, France, England and Germany and discovered that his intellectual brethren in the West were not 'monsters.'" He added, "I was the only one in the family who decided it was really important to leave."
  

    [12]
   


  Sergey's mother was less willing to leave their home in Moscow, where they had spent their entire lives. Malseed writes, "For Genia, the decision ultimately came down to Sergey. While her husband admits he was thinking as much about his own future as his son's, for her, 'it was 80/20' about Sergey." They formally applied for their
  
   exit visa
  
  in September 1978, and as a result his father was "promptly fired". For related reasons, his mother also had to leave her job. For the next eight months, without any steady income, they were forced to take on temporary jobs as they waited, afraid their request would be denied as it was for many
  
   refuseniks
  
  . During this time his parents shared responsibility for looking after him and his father taught himself
  
   computer programming
  
  . In May 1979, they were granted their official exit visas and were allowed to leave the country.
  

    [12]
   


  At an interview in October 2000, Brin said, "I know the hard times that my parents went through there and am very thankful that I was brought to the States."
  

    [17]
   

  In 2017, Brin later recalled: "I came here to the US at age six with my family from the
  
   Soviet Union
  
  , which was at that time the greatest enemy the US had... It was a dire period, the cold war, as some people remember it. It was under the threat of
  
   nuclear annihilation
  
  . And even then the US had the courage to take me and my family in as refugees."
  

    [18]
   


  In the summer of 1990, a few weeks before his 17th birthday, his father led a group of high school math students, including Sergey, on a two-week
  
   exchange program
  
  to the Soviet Union. His roommate on the trip was future Carnegie Mellon University computer science professor John Stamper. As Brin recalls, the trip awakened his childhood fear of authority and he remembered that "his first impulse on confronting Soviet oppression had been to throw pebbles at a police car". Malseed adds, "On the second day of the trip, while the group toured a
  
   sanatorium
  
  in the countryside near Moscow, Brin took his father aside, looked him in the eye and said, 'Thank you for taking us all out of Russia.'"
  

    [12]
   


  Brin attended
  
   elementary school
  
  at Paint Branch
  
   Montessori School
  
  in
  
   Adelphi, Maryland
  
  , but he received further education at home; his father, a professor in the department of mathematics at the
  
   University of Maryland
  
  , encouraged him to learn mathematics and his family helped him retain his Russian-language skills. He attended
  
   Eleanor Roosevelt High School
  
  in
  
   Greenbelt, Maryland
  
  . In September 1990 Brin enrolled in the
  
   University of Maryland
  
  , where he received his Bachelor of Science from the
  
   Department of Computer Science
  
  in 1993 with honors in computer science and mathematics, which is part of the
  
   University of Maryland College of Computer, Mathematical, and Natural Sciences
  
  .
  

    [19]
   


  Brin began his graduate study in computer science at
  
   Stanford University
  
  on a
  
   graduate fellowship
  
  from the
  
   National Science Foundation
  
  . In 1993, he interned at
  
   Wolfram Research
  
  , the developers of
  
   Mathematica
  
  .
  

    [19]
   

  As of 2008
  

    [update]
   

  he was on leave from his PhD studies at Stanford.
  

    [20]
   


  During an orientation for new students at Stanford, he met Larry Page. They seemed to disagree on most subjects. But after spending time together, they "became intellectual soul-mates and close friends". Brin's focus was on developing data mining systems while Page's was in extending "the concept of inferring the importance of a research paper from its
  
   citations
  
  in other papers".
  

    [8]
   

  Together, the pair authored a paper titled "The Anatomy of a Large-Scale
  
   Hypertextual
  
  Web Search Engine".
  

    [21]
   


  To convert the backlink data gathered by BackRub's
  
   web crawler
  
  into a measure of importance for a given web page, Brin and Page developed the PageRank algorithm, and realized that it could be used to build a
  
   search engine
  
  far superior to existing ones.
  

    [22]
   

  The new algorithm relied on a new kind of technology that analyzed the relevance of the
  
   backlinks
  
  that connected one Web page to another.
  

    [23]
   


  Combining their ideas, the pair began utilizing Page's dormitory room as a machine laboratory, and extracted spare parts from inexpensive computers to create a device that they used to connect the nascent search engine with Stanford's broadband campus network.
  

    [22]
   

  After filling Page's room with equipment, they then converted Brin's dorm room into an office and programming center, where they tested their new search engine designs on the Web. The rapid growth of their project caused Stanford's computing infrastructure to experience problems.
  

    [24]
   


  Page and Brin used the former's basic
  
   HTML
  
  programming skills to set up a simple search page for users, as they did not have a web page developer to create anything visually elaborate. They also began using any computer part they could find to assemble the necessary computing power to handle searches by multiple users. As their search engine grew in popularity among Stanford users, it required additional
  
   servers
  
  to process the queries. In August 1996, the initial version of Google, still on the Stanford University website, was made available to Internet users.
  

    [22]
   


  By early 1997, the BackRub page described the state as follows:
 
  BackRub already exhibited the rudimentary functions and characteristics of a search engine: a query input was entered and it provided a list of backlinks ranked by importance. Page recalled: "We realized that we had a querying tool. It gave you a good overall ranking of pages and ordering of follow-up pages."
  

    [26]
   

  Page said that in mid-1998 they finally realized the further potential of their project: "Pretty soon, we had 10,000 searches a day. And we figured, maybe this is really real."
  

    [24]
   


  Some compared Page and Brin's vision to the impact of
  
   Johannes Gutenberg
  
  , the inventor of modern
  
   printing
  
  :
 
   In 1440, Johannes Gutenberg introduced Europe to the mechanical printing press, printing Bibles for mass consumption. The technology allowed for books and manuscripts‍—‌originally replicated by hand‍—‌to be printed at a much faster rate, thus spreading knowledge and helping to usher in the European Renaissance
   

   ... Google has done a similar job.
   

     [27]
    


  The comparison was also noted by the authors of
  
   The Google Story
  
  : "Not since Gutenberg
  

  ... has any new invention empowered individuals, and transformed access to information, as profoundly as Google."
  

    [15]
   

  Also, not long after the two "cooked up their new engine for web searches, they began thinking about information that was at the time beyond the web," such as digitizing books and expanding health information.
  

    [24]
   


  Brin is working on other, more personal projects that reach beyond Google. For example, he and Page are trying to help solve the world's energy and climate problems at Google's philanthropic arm,
  
   Google.org
  
  , which invests in the
  
   alternative energy
  
  industry to find wider sources of
  
   renewable energy
  
  . The company acknowledges that its founders want "to solve really big problems using technology".
  

    [28]
   


  In October 2010, for example, they invested in a major offshore wind power development to assist the East coast power grid,
  

    [29]
   

  which will eventually become one of about a dozen offshore wind farms that are proposed for the region.
  

    [30]
   

  A week earlier they introduced a car that, with "artificial intelligence", can drive itself using video cameras and radar sensors.
  

    [28]
   

  In the future, drivers of cars with similar sensors would have fewer accidents. These safer vehicles could therefore be built lighter and require less fuel consumption.
  

    [31]
   

  They are trying to get companies to create innovative solutions to increasing the world's energy supply.
  

    [32]
   

  He is an investor in
  
   Tesla Motors
  
  ,
  

    [33]
   

  which has developed the
  
   Tesla Roadster
  
  , a 244-mile (393 km) range
  
   battery electric vehicle
  
  as well as the
  
   Tesla Model S
  
  , a 265-mile (426 km) range
  
   battery electric vehicle
  
  .
 
  In 2004, he and Page were named "Persons of the Week" by
  

    ABC World News Tonight
   

  . In January 2005 he was nominated to be one of the
  
   World Economic Forum
  
  's "Young Global Leaders". In June 2008, Brin invested $4.5 million in
  
   Space Adventures
  
  , the
  
   Virginia
  
  -based
  
   space tourism
  
  company. His investment will serve as a deposit for a reservation on one of Space Adventures' proposed flights in 2011. Space Adventures, the only company that sends tourists to space, has sent five of them so far.
  

    [34]
   


  Brin and Page jointly own a customized
  
   Boeing 767-200
  
  and a
  
   Dornier Alpha Jet
  
  ,
  

    [35]
   

  and pay $1.3 million a year to house them and two
  
   Gulfstream V
  
  jets owned by Google executives at
  
   Moffett Federal Airfield
  
  . The aircraft have had scientific equipment installed by
  
   NASA
  
  to allow experimental data to be collected in flight.
  

    [36]
   



    [37]
   


  In 2012, Brin has been involved with the
  
   Project Glass
  
  program and has demoed eyeglass prototypes. Project Glass is a research and development program by
  
   Google
  
  to develop an
  
   augmented reality
  

   head-mounted display
  
  (HMD).
  

    [38]
   

  The intended purpose of Project Glass products would be the hands-free displaying of information currently available to most
  
   smartphone
  
  users,
  

    [39]
   

  and allowing for interaction with the Internet via
  
   natural language
  
  voice commands.
  

    [40]
   


  Brin was also involved in the
  
   Google driverless car
  
  project. In September 2012, at the signing of the California Driverless Vehicle Bill,
  

    [41]
   

  Brin predicted that within five years, robotic cars will be available to the general public.
  

    [42]
   


  Brin is a supporter of
  
   lab-grown meat
  
  and kite-energy systems.
  

    [43]
   



    [44]
   



   The Economist
  
  magazine describes Brin's approach to life, like Page's, as based on a vision summed up by Google's motto, "of making all the world's information 'universally accessible and useful
  
   '
  
  ".
 
  Remembering his youth and his family's reasons for leaving the Soviet Union, he "agonized over Google's decision to appease the Communist government of China by allowing it to censor search engine results", but he decided that the Chinese would still be better off than without having Google available.
  

    [8]
   


  On January 12, 2010, Google reported
  
   a large cyber attack on its computers and corporate infrastructure
  
  that began a month earlier, which included accessing two Gmail accounts and the theft of Google's intellectual property. After the attack was determined to have originated in China, the company stated that it would no longer agree to censor its search engine in China and may exit the country altogether.
  
   David Drummond
  
  , Google's Senior Vice President of Corporate Development, reported that "a primary goal of the attackers was accessing the Gmail accounts of Chinese human rights activists, but that the attack also targeted 20 other large companies in the finance, technology, media and chemical sectors."
  

    [45]
   



    [46]
   

  It was later reported that the attack had also targeted "one of Google's crown jewels, a password system that controls access by millions of users worldwide".
  

    [47]
   


  In late March 2010, it officially discontinued its China-based search engine while keeping its uncensored Hong Kong site in operation. Speaking for Google, Brin stated during an interview, "One of the reasons I am glad we are making this move in China is that the China situation was really emboldening other countries to try and implement their own firewalls."
  

    [48]
   

  During another interview with
  
   Der Spiegel
  
  , he added, "For us it has always been a discussion about how we can best fight for openness on the Internet. We believe that this is the best thing that we can do for preserving the principles of the openness and freedom of information on the Internet."
  

    [49]
   


  Senator
  
   Byron Dorgan
  
  stated that "Google's decision is a strong step in favor of freedom of expression and information." And Congressman
  
   Bob Goodlatte
  
  said, "I applaud Google for its courageous step to stop censoring search results on Google.cn. Google has drawn a line in the sand and is shining a light on the very dark area of individual liberty restrictions in China."
  

    [50]
   

  From the business perspective, many recognize that the move is likely to affect Google's profits.
  
   The New Republic
  
  adds that "Google seems to have arrived at the same link that was obvious to
  
   Andrei Sakharov
  
  : the one between science and freedom," referring to the move as "heroism".
  

    [51]
   


  In May 2007, Brin married biotech analyst and entrepreneur
  
   Anne Wojcicki
  
  in the
  
   Bahamas
  
  .
  

    [52]
   



    [53]
   

  They had a son together in December 2008 and a daughter in late 2011.
  

    [54]
   

  In August 2013, it was announced that Brin and his then-wife were living separately after Brin had become romantically involved with
  
   Google Glass
  
  's marketing director.
  

    [55]
   



    [56]
   



    [57]
   

  In June 2015, Brin and Wojcicki finalized their divorce.
  

    [58]
   


  Brin's mother, Eugenia, has been diagnosed with
  
   Parkinson's disease
  
  . In 2008, he decided to make a donation to the
  
   University of Maryland School of Medicine
  
  , where his mother is being treated.
  

    [59]
   

  Brin used the services of
  
   23andMe
  
  and discovered that although Parkinson's is generally not
  
   hereditary
  
  , both he and his mother possess a
  
   mutation
  
  of the
  
   LRRK2
  
  gene (G2019S) that puts the likelihood of him developing Parkinson's in later years between 20% and 80%.
  

    [8]
   

  When asked whether ignorance was not bliss in such matters, he stated that his knowledge means that he can now take measures to ward off the disease. An editorial in
  

    The Economist
   

  magazine states that "Mr Brin regards his mutation of LRRK2 as a bug in his personal code, and thus as no different from the bugs in computer code that Google’s engineers fix every day. By helping himself, he can therefore help others as well. He considers himself lucky. ... But Mr. Brin was making a much bigger point. Isn’t knowledge always good, and certainly always better than ignorance?"
  

    [8]
   


  Brin and his ex-wife also run The Brin Wojcicki Foundation.
  

    [60]
   


  In 2002, Brin, along with Larry Page, was named the
  
   MIT
  

   Technology Review
  

   TR100
  
  , as one of the top 100 innovators in the world under the age of 35.
  

    [61]
   

  In 2003, both Brin and Page received an
  
   honorary
  
  MBA from
  
   IE Business School
  
  "for embodying the entrepreneurial spirit and lending momentum to the creation of new businesses...".
  

    [62]
   

  In 2004, they received the
  
   Marconi Foundation
  
  Prize, the "Highest Award in Engineering", and were elected
  
   Fellows
  
  of the Marconi Foundation at
  
   Columbia University
  
  . "In announcing their selection, John Jay Iselin, the Foundation's president, congratulated the two men for their invention that has fundamentally changed the way information is retrieved today."
 
  In 2003, Brin and Page were both Award Recipients and National Finalists for the EY Entrepreneur of the Year Award
  

    [63]
   


  In 2004, Brin received the
  
   Academy of Achievement's Golden Plate Award
  
  with Larry Page at a ceremony in Chicago, Illinois.
  

    [64]
   


  In November 2009,
  

    Forbes
   

  decided Brin and Page were the fifth most powerful people in the world.
  

    [65]
   

  Earlier that same year, in February, Brin was inducted into the
  
   National Academy of Engineering
  
  , which is "among the highest professional distinctions accorded to an engineer ... [and] honors those who have made outstanding contributions to engineering research, practice...". He was selected specifically, "for leadership in development of rapid indexing and retrieval of relevant information from the World Wide Web".
  

    [66]
   

  In their "Profiles" of Fellows, the
  
   National Science Foundation
  
  included a number of earlier awards:
 
   he was a featured speaker at the
   
    World Economic Forum
   
   and the Technology, Entertainment and Design Conference. ...
   

     PC Magazine
    

   has praised Google in the Top 100 Web Sites and Search Engines (1998) and awarded Google the Technical Excellence Award, for Innovation in Web Application Development in 1999. In 2000, Google earned a
   
    Webby Award
   
   , a People's Voice Award for technical achievement, and in 2001, was awarded Outstanding Search Service, Best Image Search Engine, Best Design, Most Webmaster Friendly Search Engine, and Best Search Feature at the Search Engine Watch Awards.
   

     [67]
    


  According to
  
   Forbes
  
  , he is the 12th richest person in the world with a personal wealth of US$39.2 billion as of October 2016.
  

    [68]
   


   [
   


      contradictory
     


   ]
  
