


   Criticism of
   
    Google
   

  includes aggressive and contrived
  
   tax avoidance
  
  , alleged misuse and manipulation of search results, its use of others' intellectual property, concerns that its compilation of data may violate people's
  
   privacy
  
  , censorship of search results and content, and the energy consumption of its servers as well as concerns over traditional business issues such as monopoly,
  
   restraint of trade
  
  ,
  
   antitrust
  
  , and
  
   idea borrowing
  
  .
 

   Alphabet Inc.
  
  is an American multinational public corporation invested in
  
   Internet search
  
  ,
  
   cloud computing
  
  , and advertising technologies. Google hosts and develops a number of Internet-based services and products,
  

    [1]
   

  and generates profit primarily from advertising through its
  
   AdWords
  
  program.
  

    [2]
   



    [3]
   


  Google's
  
   stated mission
  
  is "to organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and useful";
  

    [4]
   

  this mission, and the means used to accomplish it, have raised concerns among the company's critics. Much of the criticism pertains to issues that have not yet been addressed by
  
   cyber law
  
  .
 
  Google has been accused by a number of countries of avoiding paying tens of billions of dollars of tax through a convoluted scheme of inter-company licensing agreements and transfers to tax havens.
  

    [5]
   

  For example, Google has used highly contrived and artificial distinctions to avoid paying billions of pounds in
  
   corporation tax
  
  owed by its UK operations.
  

    [6]
   

  On 16 May 2013,
  
   Margaret Hodge MP
  
  , the chair of the
  
   United Kingdom
  

   Public Accounts Committee
  
  accused Google's of being "calculated and unethical" over its use of the scheme.
  

    [6]
   

  In 2015, the UK Government introduced a new law intended to penalise Google and other large
  
   multinational
  
  corporations's artificial tax avoidance.
  

    [7]
   

  Google Chairman
  
   Eric Schmidt
  
  has claimed that this scheme of Google
  

    [6]
   

  is "capitalism",
  

    [8]
   

  and that he was "very proud of it".
  

    [9]
   

  Schmidt was also criticised for his inaccurate use of the term 'capitalism' to describe billions of dollars being transferred into tax havens where no economic activity was actually taking place.
  

    [10]
   

  On 23 January 2016, Google agreed to make a payment of £130m to the UK tax authorities "in respect of previous years."
 
  Google cut its taxes by $3.1 billion in the period of 2007 to 2009 using a technique that moves most of its foreign profits through Ireland and The Netherlands to Bermuda. Afterwards, the company started to send £8 billion in profits a year to
  
   Bermuda
  
  .
  

    [11]
   

  Google's income shifting—involving strategies known to lawyers as the "
  
   Double Irish
  
  " and the "
  
   Dutch Sandwich
  
  "—helped reduce its overseas tax rate to 2.4 percent, the lowest of the top five U.S. technology companies by market capitalization, according to regulatory filings in six countries.
  

    [12]
   



    [13]
   


  According to Joe Wilcox of Microsoft-Watch, Google has increased its dominance of search, becoming an information gatekeeper, despite the conflict of interest between information gathering and the advertising surrounding that information. His colleagues do not share the same view.
  

    [14]
   


  The
  
   European Commission
  
  , the
  
   European Union
  
  's executive arm, opened a formal inquiry into Google in 2010 over concerns that the company was abusing its dominant position in search. The commission laid out its main points in May 2012, and early in 2013 Google came back with an offer to change its practices in certain search categories, hoping to settle the case and avoid a protracted antitrust inquiry. At a news conference on July 17, 2013 Joaquín Almunia, the European Union competition commissioner, said that he "concluded that the proposals that Google sent to us months ago are not enough to overcome our concerns" and he had written to Eric Schmidt, Google's executive chairman, "asking Google to present better proposals or improved proposals."
  

    [15]
   


  In the case of the now-defunct Google-Yahoo! deal of 2008—a pact for Google to sell advertising on Yahoo! search pages—the
  
   U.S. Department of Justice
  
  found that the deal would be "materially reducing important competitive rivalry between the two companies" and would violate the
  
   Sherman Antitrust Act
  
  .
  

    [16]
   


  In testimony before a
  
   U.S. Senate
  

   antitrust
  
  panel in September 2011,
  
   Eric Schmidt
  
  , Google's chairman, said that "the Internet is the ultimate level playing field" where users were "one click away" from competitors.
  

    [17]
   

  Beyond the existence of alternatives, Google's large market share was another aspect of the debate, as this exchange between
  
   Senator Herb Kohl
  
  and Mr. Schmidt at the September Senate hearing illustrates:
  

    [18]
   


   [
   


      neutrality
     

    is
    
     disputed
    

   ]
  

  During the hearing
  
   Mike Lee
  
  , Republican of Utah, accused Google of cooking its search results to favor its own services. Mr. Schmidt replied, "Senator, I can assure we haven’t cooked anything."
  

    [17]
   


  In testimony before the same Senate panel, Jeffrey Katz and
  
   Jeremy Stoppelman
  
  , the chief executives from Google's competitors
  
   Nextag
  
  and
  
   Yelp
  
  , said that Google tilts search results in its own favor, limiting choice and stifling competition.
  

    [17]
   


  In October 2012, it was reported that the
  
   U.S. Federal Trade Commission
  
  staff were preparing a recommendation that the government sue Google on antitrust grounds. The areas of concern include accusations of manipulating the search results to favor Google services such as
  
   Google Shopping
  
  for buying goods and
  
   Google Places
  
  for advertising local restaurants and businesses; whether Google's automated advertising marketplace,
  
   AdWords
  
  , discriminates against advertisers from competing online commerce services like comparison shopping sites and consumer review Web sites; whether Google's contracts with smartphone makers and carriers prevent them from removing or modifying Google products, such as its
  
   Android operating system
  
  or
  
   Google search
  
  ; and Google's use of its smartphone patents. A likely outcome of the antitrust investigations is a negotiated settlement where Google would agree not to discriminate in favor of its products over smaller competitors.
  

    [19]
   

  Federal Trade Commission ended its investigation during a period which the co-founder of Google,
  
   Larry Page
  
  , had met with individuals at the
  
   White House
  
  and the Federal Trade Commission, leading to voluntary changes by Google; since January 2009 to March 2015 employees of Google have met with officials in the White House about 230 times according to the
  

    Wall Street Journal
   

  .
  

    [20]
   


  On April 20, 2016, the European Union filed a formal antitrust complaint against Google's leverage over Android vendors, alleging that the mandatory bundling of the entire suite of proprietary Google software, hindering the ability for competing search providers to be integrated into Android, and barring vendors from producing devices running forks of Android, constituted anti-competitive practices.
  

    [21]
   

  In August 2016, Google was fined US$6.75 million by the Russian
  
   Federal Antimonopoly Service
  
  (FAS) under similar allegations by
  
   Yandex
  
  .
  

    [22]
   


  In 2006/2007, a group of Austrian researchers observed a tendency to misuse the Google engine as a "reality interface". Ordinary users as well as journalists tend to rely on the first pages of Google search, assuming that everything not listed there is either not important or simply does not exist. The researchers say that "Google has become the main interface for our whole reality. To be precise: with the Google interface the user gets the impression that the search results imply a kind of totality. In fact, one only sees a small part of what one could see if one also integrates other research tools".
  

    [23]
   



   Eric Schmidt
  
  , Google's chief executive, said in a 2007 interview with the
  
   Financial Times
  
  : "The goal is to enable Google users to be able to ask the question such as 'What shall I do tomorrow?' and 'What job shall I take?'".
  

    [24]
   

  Schmidt reaffirmed this during a 2010 interview with the Wall Street Journal: "I actually think most people don't want Google to answer their questions, they want Google to tell them what they should be doing next."
  

    [25]
   


  Numerous companies and individuals, for example, MyTriggers.com
  

    [26]
   

  and transport tycoon Sir Brian Souter
  

    [27]
   

  have voiced concerns regarding the fairness of Google's PageRank and search results after their web sites disappeared from Google's first-page results. In the case of MyTriggers.com, the Ohio-based shopping comparison search site accused Google of favoring its own services in search results (although the judge eventually ruled that the site failed to show harm to other similar businesses).
 
  The page ranking algorithm of Google can and has been manipulated for political and humorous reasons. To illustrate the view that Google's search engine could be subjected to manipulation, Google Watch implemented a
  
   Google bomb
  
  by linking the phrase "out-of-touch executives" to Google's own page on its corporate management. The attempt was mistakenly attributed to disgruntled Google employees by
  

    The New York Times
   

  , which later printed a correction.
  

    [28]
   



    [29]
   


  Daniel Brandt started the Google Watch website and has criticized Google's
  
   PageRank
  
  algorithms, saying that they discriminate against new websites and favor established sites.
  

    [30]
   

  Chris Beasley, who started Google Watch-Watch, disagrees, saying that Mr. Brandt overstates the amount of discrimination that new websites face and that new websites will naturally rank lower when the ranking is based on a site's "reputation". In Google's world a site's reputation is in part determined by how many and which other sites link to it (links from sites with a "better" reputation of their own carry more weight). Since new sites will seldom be as heavily linked as older more established sites, they aren't as well known, won't have as much of a reputation, and will receive a lower page ranking.
  

    [31]
   


  In testimony before a
  
   U.S. Senate
  

   antitrust
  
  panel in September 2011, Jeffrey Katz, the chief executive of
  
   NexTag
  
  , said that Google's business interests conflict with its engineering commitment to an open-for-all Internet and that: "Google doesn't play fair. Google rigs its results, biasing in favor of
  
   Google Shopping
  
  and against competitors like us." Jeremy Stoppelman, the chief of
  
   Yelp
  
  , said sites like his have to cooperate with Google because it is the gateway to so many users and "Google then gives its own product preferential treatment." In earlier testimony at the same hearing
  
   Eric Schmidt
  
  , Google's chairman, said that Google does not "cook the books" to favor its own products and services.
  

    [17]
   


  In late May 2012, Google announced that they will no longer be maintaining a strict separation between search results and advertising. Google Shopping will be replaced with a nearly identical interface, according to the announcement, but only paid advertisers will be listed instead of the neutral aggregate listings shown previously. Furthermore, rankings will be determined primarily by which advertisers place the highest "bid", though the announcement does not elaborate on this process. The transition will be complete in the fall of 2012.
  

    [32]
   


  As a result of this change to Google Shopping,
  
   Microsoft
  
  , who operates the competing search engine
  
   Bing
  
  , launched a public information campaign titled
  
   Scroogled
  
  .
  

    [33]
   

  The ad campaign was developed by leading political campaign strategist
  
   Mark Penn
  
  .
  

    [34]
   


  It is unclear how consumers will react to this move. Critics charge that Google has effectively abandoned its "
  
   Don't be evil
  
  " motto and that small businesses will be unable to compete against their larger counterparts. There is also concern that consumers who did not see this announcement will be unaware that they are now looking at paid advertisements and that the top results are no longer determined solely based on relevance but instead will be manipulated according to which company paid the most.
  

    [35]
   



    [36]
   


  Google's ambitious plans to scan millions of books and make them readable through its search engine have been criticized for
  
   copyright infringement
  
  .
  

    [37]
   

  The
  
   Association for Learned and Professional Society Publishers
  
  and the
  
   Association of American University Presses
  
  both issued statements strongly opposing
  
   Google Print
  
  , stating that "Google, an enormously successful company, claims a sweeping right to appropriate the property of others for its own commercial use unless it is told, case by case and instance by instance, not to."
  

    [38]
   


  In a separate dispute in November 2009, the China Written Works Copyright Society (CWWCS), which protects Chinese writers' copyrights, accused Google of scanning 18,000 books by 570 Chinese writers without authorization, for its Google Books library.
  

    [39]
   

  Toward the end of 2009 representatives of the CWWCS said talks with Google about copyright issues are progressing well, that first they "want Google to admit their mistake and apologize", then talk about compensation, while at the same time they "don't want Google to give up China in its digital library project". On November 20, 2009, Google agreed to provide a list of Chinese books it had scanned, but did not admit having "infringed" copyright laws.
  

    [40]
   

  In a January 9, 2010 statement the head of Google Books in the Asia-Pacific said "communications with Chinese writers have not been good enough" and apologized to the writers.
  

    [41]
   



   Kazaa
  
  and the
  
   Church of Scientology
  
  have used the
  
   Digital Millennium Copyright Act
  
  (DMCA) to demand that Google remove references to allegedly
  
   copyrighted
  
  material on their sites.
  

    [42]
   



    [43]
   


  Search engines such as Google's that link to sites in "good faith" fall under the safe harbor provisions of the
  
   Online Copyright Infringement Liability Limitation Act
  
  which is part of DMCA. If they remove links to infringing content after receiving a
  
   take down notice
  
  , they are not liable. Google removes links to infringing content when requested, provided that supporting evidence is supplied. However, it is sometimes difficult to judge whether or not certain sites are infringing and Google (and other search engines) will sometimes refuse to remove web pages from its index. To complicate matters there have been conflicting rulings from U.S. courts on whether simply linking to infringing content constitutes "contributory infringement" or not.
  

    [44]
   



    [45]
   




    The New York Times
   

  has complained that the
  
   caching
  
  of their content during a web crawl, a feature utilized by search engines including
  
   Google Web Search
  
  , violates copyright.
  

    [46]
   

  Google observes Internet standard mechanisms for requesting that caching be disabled via the
  
   robots.txt
  
  file, which is another mechanism that allows operators of a website to request that part or all of their site not be included in search engine results, or via META tags, which allow a content editor to specify whether a document can be crawled or archived, or whether the links on the document can be followed. The U.S. District Court of Nevada ruled that Google's caches do not constitute copyright infringement under
  
   American law
  
  in
  

    Field v. Google
   

  and
  
   Parker v. Google
  
  .
  

    [47]
   



    [48]
   


  On February 20, 2017, Google agreed to a voluntary United Kingdom code of practice obligating it to demote links to copyright-infringing content in its search results.
  

    [49]
   



    [50]
   



   Google Map Maker
  
  allows user contributed data to be put into the
  
   Google Maps
  
  service,
  

    [51]
   

  similar to
  
   OpenStreetMap
  
  it includes concepts such as organising mapping parties and mapping for humanitarian efforts.
  

    [52]
   

  It has been criticised for taking work done for free by the general public and claiming commercial ownership of it without returning any contributions back to the
  
   commons
  


    [53]
   

  as their restrictive license makes it incompatible with most open projects by preventing commercial use or use by competitive services.
  

    [54]
   


  Google's March 1, 2012 privacy change, enables the company to share data across a wide variety of services.
  

    [55]
   

  This includes embedded services in millions of third-party websites using Adsense and Analytics. The policy was widely criticized as creating an environment that discourages Internet innovation by making Internet users more fearful online.
  

    [56]
   


  In December 2009, after privacy concerns were raised, Google's CEO,
  
   Eric Schmidt
  
  , declared: "If you have something that you don't want anyone to know, maybe you shouldn't be doing it in the first place. If you really need that kind of privacy, the reality is that search engines—including Google—do retain this information for some time and it's important, for example, that we are all subject in the United States to the Patriot Act and it is possible that all that information could be made available to the authorities."
  

    [57]
   



   Privacy International
  
  has raised concerns regarding the dangers and privacy implications of having a centrally located, widely popular data warehouse of millions of Internet users' searches, and how under controversial existing U.S. law, Google can be forced to hand over all such information to the
  
   U.S. government
  
  .
  

    [58]
   

  In its 2007 Consultation Report, Privacy International ranked Google as "Hostile to Privacy", its lowest rating on their report, making Google the only company in the list to receive that ranking.
  

    [58]
   



    [59]
   



    [60]
   


  At the Techonomy conference in 2010, Eric Schmidt predicted that "true transparency and no anonymity" is the way forward for the internet: "In a world of asynchronous threats it is too dangerous for there not to be some way to identify you. We need a [verified] name service for people. Governments will demand it." He also said that "If I look at enough of your messaging and your location, and use artificial intelligence, we can predict where you are going to go. Show us 14 photos of yourself and we can identify who you are. You think you don't have 14 photos of yourself on the internet? You've got Facebook photos!"
  

    [61]
   


  In the summer of 2016, Google quietly dropped its ban on personally-identifiable info in its DoubleClick ad service. Google's privacy policy was changed to state it "may" combine web-browsing records obtained through DoubleClick with what the company learns from the use of other Google services. While new users were automatically opted-in, existing users were asked if they wanted to opt-in, and it remains possible to opt-out by going to the Activity controls in the My Account page of a Google account.
  
   ProPublica
  
  states that "The practical result of the change is that the DoubleClick ads that follow people around on the web may now be customized to them based on your name and other information Google knows about you. It also means that Google could now, if it wished to, build a complete portrait of a user by name, based on everything they write in email, every website they visit and the searches they conduct." Google contacted
  
   ProPublica
  
  to correct the fact that it doesn't "currently" use Gmail keywords to target web ads.
  

    [62]
   


  Google has been criticized for various instances of
  
   censoring
  
  its search results, many times in compliance with the laws of various countries, most notably while it operated in
  
   China
  
  from January 2006 to March 2010.
 
  As of December 12, 2012, Google's SafeSearch feature applies to image searches in the United States. Prior to the change three SafeSearch settings—"on", "moderate", and "off"—were available to users. Following the change, two "Filter explicit results" settings—"on" and "off"—were newly established. The former and new "on" settings are similar, and exclude explicit images from search results. The new "off" setting still permits explicit images to appear in search results, but users need to enter more specific search requests, and no direct equivalent of the old "off" setting exists following the change. The change brings image search results into line with Google's existing settings for web and video search.
 
  Some users have stated that the lack of a completely unfiltered option amounts to "censorship" by Google. A Google spokesperson disagreed, saying that Google is "not censoring any adult content," but "want to show users exactly what they are looking for—but we aim not to show sexually-explicit results unless a user is specifically searching for them."
  

    [63]
   


  The search term "
  
   bisexual
  
  " was blacklisted for
  
   Instant Search
  
  until 2012, when it was removed at the request of the
  
   BiNet USA
  
  advocacy organisation.
  

    [64]
   


  Google has been involved in censorship of certain sites in specific countries and regions. Until March 2010, Google adhered to the
  
   Internet censorship policies of China
  
  ,
  

    [65]
   

  enforced by filters colloquially known as "The
  
   Great Firewall of China
  
  ". Google.cn search results were filtered to remove some results concerning the
  
   Tiananmen Square protests of 1989
  
  , sites supporting the independence movements of
  
   Tibet
  
  and
  
   Taiwan
  
  , the
  
   Falun Gong
  
  movement, and other information perceived to be harmful to the People's Republic of China (PRC). Google claimed that some censorship is necessary in order to keep the Chinese government from blocking Google entirely, as occurred in 2002.
  

    [66]
   

  The company claims it did not plan to give the government information about users who search for blocked content, and will inform users that content has been restricted if they attempt to search for it.
  

    [67]
   

  As of 2009, Google was the only major China-based search engine to explicitly
  
   inform
  
  the user when search results are blocked or hidden. As of December 2012, Google no longer informs the user of possible censorship for certain queries during search.
  

    [68]
   


  Some Chinese Internet users were critical of Google for assisting the Chinese government in repressing its own citizens, particularly those dissenting against the government and advocating for human rights.
  

    [69]
   

  Furthermore, Google had been denounced and called hypocritical by
  
   Free Media Movement
  
  for agreeing to China's demands while simultaneously fighting the United States government's requests for similar information.
  

    [70]
   

  Google China had also been condemned by
  
   Reporters Without Borders
  
  ,
  

    [70]
   


   Human Rights Watch
  


    [71]
   

  and
  
   Amnesty International
  
  .
  

    [72]
   


  In 2009,
  
   China Central Television
  
  ,
  
   Xinhua News Agency
  
  , and
  
   People's Daily
  
  all reported on Google's "dissemination of obscene information", and People's Daily claimed that "Google's 'don't be evil' motto becomes a fig leaf".
  

    [73]
   



    [74]
   

  The Chinese government imposed administrative penalties to Google China, and demanded a reinforcement of censorship.
  

    [75]
   


  In 2010, according to a
  
   leaked diplomatic cable
  
  from the U.S. Embassy in Beijing, there were reports that the Chinese Politburo directed the
  
   intrusion of Google's computer systems in a worldwide coordinated campaign of computer sabotage and the attempt to access information about Chinese dissidents
  
  , carried out by "government operatives, public security experts and Internet outlaws recruited by the Chinese government."
  

    [76]
   

  The report suggested that it was part of an ongoing campaign in which attackers have "broken into American government computers and those of Western allies, the Dalai Lama and American businesses since 2002."
 
  In response to
  
   the attack
  
  , Google announced that they were "no longer willing to continue censoring our results on Google.cn, and so over the next few weeks we will be discussing with the Chinese government the basis on which we could operate an unfiltered search engine within the law, if at all."
  

    [77]
   



    [78]
   

  On March 22, 2010, after talks with Chinese authorities failed to reach an agreement, the company redirected its censor-complying
  
   Google China
  
  service to its Google Hong Kong service, which is outside the jurisdiction of Chinese censorship laws. From the business perspective, many recognize that the move was likely to affect Google's profits: "Google is going to pay a heavy price for its move, which is why it deserves praise for refusing to censor its service in China."
  

    [79]
   

  However, at least as of March 23, 2010, "The Great Firewall" continues to censor search results from the Hong Kong portal, www.google.com.hk (as it does with the US portal, www.google.com) for controversial terms such as "Falun gong" and "the June 4 incident" (Tiananmen Square incident).
  

    [80]
   



    [81]
   



    [82]
   


  Google has been involved in censorship of Google Maps satellite imagery countrywide affecting Android and iOS apps using .com, .tr, and .tld automatically. Desktop users can easily evade this censorship by just removing .tr, and .tld from the URL but the same technique is impossible with smartphone apps.
 
  In February 2003, Google stopped showing the advertisements of
  
   Oceana
  
  , a non-profit organization protesting a
  
   major cruise ship operation
  
  's sewage treatment practices. Google cited its editorial policy at the time, stating "Google does not accept advertising if the ad or site advocates against other individuals, groups, or organizations."
  

    [83]
   

  The policy was later changed.
  

    [84]
   


  In April 2008, Google refused to run ads for a UK Christian group opposed to abortion, explaining that "At this time, Google policy does not permit the advertisement of websites that contain 'abortion and religion-related content.'"
  

    [85]
   

  The UK Christian group sued Google for discrimination, and as a result in September 2008 Google changed its policy and anti-abortion ads were allowed.
  

    [86]
   


  In August 2008, Google closed the AdSense account of a site that carried a negative view of
  
   Scientology
  
  , the second closing of such a site within 3 months.
  

    [87]
   

  It is not certain if the account revocations actually were on the grounds of anti-religious content, however the cases have raised questions about Google's terms in regards to AdSense/AdWords. The AdSense policy states that "Sites displaying Google ads may not include […] advocacy against any individual, group, or organization",
  

    [88]
   

  which allows Google to revoke the above-mentioned AdSense accounts.
 
  In May 2011, Google cancelled the AdWord advertisement purchased by a Dublin sex worker rights group named "Turn Off the Blue Light" (TOBL),
  

    [89]
   

  claiming that it represented an "egregious violation" of company ad policy by "selling adult sexual services". However, TOBL is a nonprofit campaign for sex worker rights and is not advertising or selling adult sexual services.
  

    [90]
   

  In July, after TOBL members held a protest outside Google's European headquarters in Dublin and wrote to complain, Google relented, reviewed the group's website, found its content to be advocating a political position, and restored the AdWord advertisement.
  

    [91]
   


  In June 2012, Google rejected the
  
   Australian Sex Party
  
  's ads for
  
   AdWords
  
  and sponsored search results for the July 12 by-election for the
  
   state seat of Melbourne
  
  , saying the Party breached its rules which prevent solicitation of donations by a website that did not display tax exempt status. Although the Sex Party amended its website to display tax deductibility information, Google continued to ban the ads. The ads were reinstated on election eve after it was reported in the media that the Sex Party was considering suing Google. On September 13, 2012 the Party lodged formal complaints against Google with the
  
   US Department of Justice
  
  and the Australian competition watchdog, accusing Google of "unlawful interference in the conduct of a state election in
  
   Victoria
  
  with corrupt intent" in violation of the
  
   Foreign Corrupt Practices Act
  
  .
  

    [92]
   


  YouTube is a
  
   video sharing
  
  website acquired by Google in 2006. YouTube's
  
   Terms of Service
  
  prohibits the posting of videos which violate
  
   copyrights
  
  or depict pornography, illegal acts, gratuitous violence, or
  
   hate speech
  
  .
  

    [93]
   

  User-posted videos that violate such terms may be removed and replaced with a message stating: "This video is no longer available because its content violated YouTube's Terms of Service".
 
  YouTube has been criticized by national governments for failing to police content. For example, videos
  

    [94]
   

  have been critically accused for being "left up", among other videos featuring unwarranted violence or strong ill-intention against people who probably didn't want this to be published. In 2006, Thailand blocked access to YouTube for users with Thai IP addresses. Thai authorities identified 20 offensive videos and demanded that YouTube remove them before it would unblock any YouTube content.
  

    [95]
   

  In 2007 a Turkish judge ordered access to YouTube blocked because of content that insulted
  
   Mustafa Kemal Atatürk
  
  , which is a crime under Turkish law.
  

    [95]
   

  On February 22, 2008,
  
   Pakistan Telecommunications Authority
  
  (PTA) attempted to block regional access to YouTube following a government order. The attempt inadvertently caused a worldwide YouTube blackout that took 2 hours to correct.
  

    [96]
   

  Four days later, PTA lifted the ban after YouTube removed controversial religious comments made by a Dutch Member of Parliament
  

    [97]
   

  concerning Islam.
  

    [98]
   


  YouTube has also been criticized by its users for attempting to censor content. In November 2007, the account of
  
   Wael Abbas
  
  , a well known Egyptian activist who posted videos of police brutality, voting irregularities and anti-government demonstrations, was blocked for three days.
  

    [99]
   



    [100]
   



    [101]
   


  In February 2008, a video produced by the
  
   American Life League
  
  that accused a
  
   Planned Parenthood
  
  television commercial of promoting
  
   recreational sex
  
  was removed, then reinstated two days later.
  

    [102]
   



    [103]
   

  In October, a video by political speaker
  
   Pat Condell
  
  criticizing the British government for officially sanctioning sharia law courts in Britain was removed, then reinstated two days later.
  

    [104]
   



    [105]
   

  In response, his fans uploaded copies of the video themselves, and the
  
   National Secular Society
  
  wrote to YouTube in protest.
 
  YouTube also pulled a video of columnist
  
   Michelle Malkin
  
  showing violence by Muslim extremists.
  

    [106]
   

  Siva Vaidhyanathan, a professor of Media Studies at the University of Virginia, commented that while, in his opinion, Michelle Malkin disseminates bigotry in her blog, "that does not mean that this particular video is bigoted; it's not. But because it's by Malkin, it's a target."
  

    [107]
   


  YouTube censors videos by country on its site. For example, videos from certain countries are blocked from being viewed in the United States and other countries on copyright grounds. But some users allege that that is blatant censorship by YouTube because it forbids users from viewing the videos that they want to see. YouTube has received numerous criticisms for blocking videos containing content from certain entertainment companies. YouTube has been criticized for heavy-handed censorship. Some allege that this censorship is xenophobic because it blocks people from enjoying foreign works because they lived in a foreign country where the content has been blocked.
 
  YouTube has also been given feedback concerning other YouTube users embedding the headings for blocked content in view of increasing the views on their own videos which have no relevance to content uploaded into YouTube. The results appear in Google Search but not in the video content. This practice of blocking video content rather than removing content serves no purpose only to allow the propagation of blocked content throughout the Internet which may not happen if the material in question is removed.
 
  YouTube launched a localized Pakistani version of its website for the users in Pakistan in order to censor content considered blasphemic by the Pakistani government as a part of its deal with the latter. The three-year ban on YouTube by Pakistani government was subsequently lifted.
  

    [108]
   



    [109]
   


  In 2013, Google successfully prevented the
  
   Swedish Language Council
  
  from including the
  
   Swedish
  
  version of the word "
  
   ungoogleable
  
  " ("
  

    ogooglebar
   

  ") in its list of new words.
  

    [110]
   

  Google objected to its definition (which referred to web searches in general without mentioning Google specifically) and the Council was forced to remove it to avoid legal confrontation with Google.
  

    [111]
   

  They also accused Google of "trying to control the Swedish language".
  

    [112]
   


  Since 2015, Google restricts access to software in
  
   Crimea
  
  and
  
   Sevastopol
  
  after the United States issued sanctions against the Russian government due to the
  
   2014 Russian military intervention in Ukraine
  
  .
 
  Google has been criticized for the high amount of energy used to maintain its servers,
  

    [113]
   

  but was praised by
  
   Greenpeace
  
  for the use of renewable sources of energy to run them.
  

    [114]
   

  Google has pledged to spend millions of dollars to investigate cheap, clean,
  
   renewable energy
  
  , and has installed
  
   solar panels
  
  on the roofs at its
  
   Mountain View
  
  facilities.
  

    [115]
   



    [116]
   

  In 2010, Google also invested $39 million in wind power.
  

    [117]
   


  In late 2013, activists in the San Francisco Bay Area began protesting the use of shuttle buses by Google and other tech companies, viewing them as symbols of
  
   gentrification
  
  and
  
   displacement
  
  in a city where the rapid growth of the tech sector has driven up housing prices.
  

    [118]
   



    [119]
   


  On August 15, 2007 Google discontinued its Download-to-own/Download-to-rent (DTO/DTR) program.
  

    [120]
   

  Some videos previously purchased for ownership under that program were no longer viewable when the embedded
  
   Digital Rights Management
  
  (DRM) licenses were revoked. Google gave refunds for the full amount spent on videos using "gift certificates" (or "bonuses") to their customers' "Google Checkout Account".
  

    [121]
   



    [122]
   

  After a public uproar, Google issued full refunds to the credit cards of the Google Video users without revoking the gift certificates.
 
  For some search results, Google provides a secondary search box that can be used to search within a website identified from the first search. It sparked controversy among some online publishers and retailers. When performing a second search within a specific website, advertisements from competing and rival companies often showed up together with the results from the website being searched. This has the potential to draw users away from the website they were originally searching.
  

    [123]
   

  "While the service could help increase traffic, some users could be siphoned away as Google uses the prominence of the brands to sell ads, typically to competing companies."
  

    [124]
   

  In order to combat this controversy, Google has offered to turn off this feature for companies who request to have it removed.
  

    [124]
   


  According to software engineer Ben Lee and Product Manager Jack Menzel, the idea for search within search originated from the way users were searching. It appeared that users were often not finding exactly what they needed while trying to explore within a company site. "Teleporting" on the web, where users need only type part of the name of a website into Google (no need to remember the entire URL) in order to find the correct site, is what helps Google users complete their search. Google took this concept a step further and instead of just "teleporting", users could type in keywords to search within the website of their choice.
  

    [125]
   


  Google is criticized for naming their programming language "
  
   Go
  
  " while there is already an existing programming language called "
  
   Go!
  
  "
  

    [126]
   



    [127]
   



    [128]
   


  Google has been criticised for providing information that could potentially be useful to terrorists. In the UK during March 2010,
  
   Liberal Democrats
  
  MP
  
   Paul Keetch
  
  and unnamed military officers criticised Google for including pictures of the outside of the headquarters of the
  
   SAS
  
  at
  
   RAF Base Hereford
  
  , stating that terrorists might use this information to plan attacks, rather than having to drive past it themselves. Google responded that there was no appreciable security risk and that it had no intention of removing the pictures.
  

    [129]
   


  On Google Maps, street view and 360 degree images of military bases were removed at the Pentagon's request.
  

    [130]
   


  Despite being one of the world's largest and most influential companies, unlike many other technology companies, Google does not disclose its political spending. In August 2010,
  
   New York City Public Advocate, Bill de Blasio
  
  launched a national campaign urging the corporation to disclose all of its political spending.
  

    [131]
   


  Google sponsors several non-profit lobbying groups, such as the Coalition for a Digital Economy (Coadec) in the UK.
  

    [132]
   

  Google has sponsored meetings of the conservative
  
   Competitive Enterprise Institute
  
  who have had speakers including libertarian Republican and
  
   Tea Party
  
  member, and Senator for Kentucky,
  
   Rand Paul
  
  .
  

    [133]
   


  In 2013, Google joined the
  
   American Legislative Exchange Council
  
  (ALEC).
  

    [134]
   



    [135]
   



    [136]
   

  In September 2014, Google chairman Eric Schmidt announced the company would leave ALEC for "lying" about climate change and "hurting our children."
  

    [137]
   



   Peter Thiel
  
  stated that Google had too much influence on the
  
   Obama administration
  
  , claiming that the company "had more power under Obama than
  
   Exxon
  
  had under
  
   Bush 43
  
  ".
  

    [138]
   

  There are many revolving door examples between Google and the U.S. government. This includes: 53 revolving door moves between Google and the White House; 22 former White House officials who left the administration to work for Google and 31 Google executives who joined the White House;
  

    [139]
   

  45
  
   Obama for America
  
  campaign staffers leaving for Google or Google controlled companies; 38 revolving door moves between Google and government positions involving national security, intelligence or the Department of Defense;
  

    [140]
   

  23 revolving door moves between Google and the State Department; and 18 Pentagon officials moving to Google.
 
  On February 16, 2016, internet
  
   reviewer
  

   Doug Walker
  
  (The
  
   Nostalgia Critic
  
  ) posted a video about his concerns related to YouTube's current copyright claiming system apparently being tipped in favor of those who make the claims rather than the creators, despite many of those videos being reported as covered under
  
   Fair Use
  
  laws. The video featured stories of other YouTubers' experiences with the copyright system, including fellow
  
   Channel Awesome
  
  producer
  
   Brad Jones
  
  , who received a strike on his channel for uploading a film review that took place in a parked car and contained no footage from the film itself. In the video, Walker encouraged other YouTubers and viewers to spread the message using the
  
   hashtag
  
  #WTFU (Where's the Fair Use?) on social media.
  

    [141]
   

  The hashtag spread among multiple YouTubers, who gave their support to Walker and Channel Awesome and relaying their own stories of issues with YouTube's copyright system, including Dan Murrell of
  
   Screen Junkies
  
  ,
  

    [142]
   


   GradeAUnderA
  
  , and
  
   Let's Play
  
  producers Mark Fishbach (
  
   Markiplier
  
  ) and Seán William McLoughlin (
  
   Jacksepticeye
  
  ).
  

    [141]
   


  Ten days later, on February 26, 2016, YouTube CEO Susan Wojcicki tweeted a link to a post from the YouTube Help Forum and thanked the community for bringing the issue to their attention. The post, written by a member of the YouTube Policy Team named Spencer (no last name was given), stated that they will be working to strengthen communication between creators and YouTube Support and "improvements to increase transparency into the status of monetization claims."
 
  Most YouTube videos allow users to leave comments, and these have attracted attention for the
  
   negative aspects
  
  of both their form and content. In 2006,
  

    Time
   

  praised
  
   Web 2.0
  
  for enabling "community and collaboration on a scale never seen before", and added that YouTube "harnesses the stupidity of crowds as well as its wisdom. Some of the comments on YouTube make you weep for the future of humanity just for the spelling alone, never mind the obscenity and the naked hatred".
  

    [143]
   



    The Guardian
   

  in 2009 described users' comments on YouTube as:
 
   Juvenile, aggressive, misspelled, sexist, homophobic, swinging from raging at the contents of a video to providing a pointlessly detailed description followed by a LOL, YouTube comments are a hotbed of infantile debate and unashamed ignorance –  with the occasional burst of wit shining through.
   

     [144]
    


  In September 2008,
  

    The Daily Telegraph
   

  commented that YouTube was "notorious" for "some of the most confrontational and ill-formed comment exchanges on the internet", and reported on YouTube Comment Snob, "a new piece of software that blocks rude and illiterate posts".
  

    [145]
   



    The Huffington Post
   

  noted in April 2012 that finding comments on YouTube that appear "offensive, stupid and crass" to the "vast majority" of the people is hardly difficult.
  

    [146]
   


  On November 6, 2013, Google implemented a new comment system that requires all YouTube users to use a Google+ account to comment on videos, thereby making the comment system Google+-orientated.
  

    [147]
   

  The corporation stated that the change is necessary to personalize comment sections for viewers, eliciting an overwhelmingly negative public response—YouTube co-founder
  
   Jawed Karim
  
  also expressed disdain by writing on his channel: "why the fuck do I need a Google+ account to comment on a video?".
  

    [148]
   

  The official YouTube announcement received over 59,000 "thumbs down" votes and only just over 3,300 "thumbs up" votes, while an online petition demanding Google+'s removal gained more than 230,000 signatures in just over two months.
  

    [149]
   



    [150]
   

  Writing in the
  
   Newsday
  
  blog Silicon Island, Chase Melvin noted: "Google+ is nowhere near as popular a social media network as Facebook, but it's essentially being forced upon millions of YouTube users who don't want to lose their ability to comment on videos."
  

    [151]
   

  In the same article Melvin adds:
 
   Perhaps user complaints are justified, but the idea of revamping the old system isn't so bad. Think of the crude, misogynistic and racially-charged mudslinging that has transpired over the last eight years on YouTube without any discernible moderation. Isn't any attempt to curb unidentified libelers worth a shot? The system is far from perfect, but Google should be lauded for trying to alleviate some of the damage caused by irate YouTubers hiding behind animosity and anonymity.
   

     [151]
    


  On July 27, 2015 Google announces that Google+ will no longer be required for various services (including YouTube).
  

    [152]
   



    [153]
   



    [154]
   

  Currently a Google+ account aren't required anymore and can be deleted safely.
  

    [155]
   


  Google has supported
  
   net neutrality
  
  in the US, while opposing it in India by supporting
  
   zero-rating
  
  .
  

    [156]
   


  On April 1, 2016, the Mic Drop April fools joke in Gmail caused real damages for users who accidentally clicked the button Google installed on that occasion.
  

    [157]
   

