

   Nokian Footwear
  
  (
  
   Finnish
  
  :
  

    Nokian Jalkineet
   

  ) is a
  
   Finnish
  
  manufacturer of boots, today part of the Finnish company
  
   Berner
  
  . Nokian Footwear was founded in 1990, but its history extends back to 1898, when Eduard Polón and a group of other Finnish businessmen decided to establish the company Suomen Gummitehdas Oy (Finnish Rubber Works Ltd) in
  
   Helsinki
  
  . After operating for a few years, the factory began to produce rubber
  
   galoshes
  
  , which competed successfully against Russian imports. After several years of production in Helsinki, the factory was moved to the town of
  
   Nokia
  
  . Soon after, the company began to use the brand Nokia, communicating Finnishness, and to distinguish itself from the cheaper Russian products.
 
  Suomen Gummitehdas was soon manufacturing rubber goods ranging from machine belts to hoses and vehicle tyres. Later Suomen Gummitehdas Oy changed its name to a more modern Suomen Kumitehdas Oy. In 1967, Suomen Kumitehdas and Suomen Kaapelitehdas (Finnish Cable Works) merged with the forest and power industry company Nokia Aktiebolag (Nokia Company) to form
  
   Nokia Corporation
  
  , the current telecommunications corporation. The Group’s fields of business were the
  
   rubber
  
  ,
  
   cable
  
  and
  
   forest
  
  industries as well as
  
   electricity generation
  
  and
  
   electronics
  
  .
 
  At the end of the 1980s, the different industrial sectors of Nokia Corporation decided to focus on their own areas of expertise.
  
   Nokian Tyres
  
  left in 1988 to form its own, independent company and two years later, in 1990, Nokian Footwear was founded. The parent company Nokia Corporation focused on
  
   telecommunications
  
  and divested itself of all of its non-telecommunications divisions.
  
   Nokian
  
  is "Nokia" in the
  
   genitive
  
  , thus
  
   Nokian Footwear
  
  means "Footwear of Nokia".
 
  In 2005, the Finnish family business
  
   Berner
  
  bought Nokian Footwear and assumed ownership of the Nokian Footwear brands and closely guarded rubber recipes. They sell retro design classics such as Hai and Kontio rubber boots.
 
