


   Withings
  
  (pronounced "with-things")
  

    [2]
   

  is a French
  
   consumer electronics
  
  company headquartered in
  
   Issy-les-Moulineaux
  
  ,
  
   France
  
  , with offices in
  
   Cambridge, Massachusetts
  
  ,
  
   USA
  
  , and
  
   Hong Kong
  
  , distributing products worldwide. Withings is known for design and innovation in
  
   connected
  
  health devices, such as the first
  
   Wi-Fi
  

   scale
  
  on the market (introduced in 2009), an
  
   FDA
  
  -cleared
  
   blood pressure monitor
  
  , a high-definition wireless security camera, a smart sleep system, and a line of automatic
  
   activity tracking
  
  watches. Having received numerous awards for its products and innovation, including
  
   CES
  
  awards, Withings was a flagship company of the
  
   French Tech
  
  community until it was purchased by Finnish company
  
   Nokia
  
  on 26 April 2016. The deal closed on 31 May, with Withings having been absorbed into
  
   Nokia Technologies
  
  ' new Digital Health unit led by the former Withings CEO.
  

    [3]
   



    [4]
   

  The Withings brand continues to be used but will be retired in summer 2017 in favor of the Nokia brand.
 


  Withings was founded in 2008 by two executives from the technology and telecom industry:
  
   Éric Carreel
  
  , co-founder of
  
   Inventel
  
  , and Cédric Hutchings.
  

    [5]
   

  The company's first product was the connected body scale, which officially launched in June 2009.
  

    [6]
   


  In September 2010, Withings received its first venture capital funding - $3.8 million from Ventech - to fund the development of the company's next two products.
  

    [7]
   

  In January 2011, Withings announced at the
  
   Consumer Electronics Show
  
  in
  
   Las Vegas
  
  that its second product would be a
  
   blood pressure monitor
  
  that connects to the
  
   iPhone
  
  .
  

    [8]
   

  It also announced it would produce a
  
   baby monitor
  
  for use with
  
   smartphones
  
  and other connected devices, which was made available to purchase across Europe in November 2011 and in the United States in February 2012.
  

    [9]
   


  Withings received a $30 million investment from
  
   Bpifrance
  
  , Idinvest Partners, 360 CapitalPartners, and Ventech in July 2013.
  

    [10]
   


  The company integrated with
  
   Apple's
  

   HealthKit
  
  platform in October 2014. The compatibility across Withing's range of connected devices enabled the integration of self data into the
  
   iOS
  

   Health app
  
  .
  

    [11]
   


  At WebSummit in
  
   Dublin
  
  , 2015, the company announced a partnership with
  
   MyFitnessPal
  
  after a joint study between the two companies revealed that people who track their calories and weight are 7 times more likely to lose weight.
  

    [12]
   



    [13]
   

  The partnership combined Withings' Health Mate app with MyFitnessPal's nutrition data to let the users know whether they were exercising enough in relation to their diet.
  

    [14]
   


  In April 2016,
  
   Nokia
  
  announced it had struck a deal to acquire Withings and integrate it with the group's
  
   Nokia Technologies
  
  division.
  

    [1]
   

  The deal closed on 31 May 2016. The CEO of Withings Cédric Hutchings, became the leader of the new Digital Health business of Nokia Technologies, the successor of Withings. At the time of the acquisition, the Withings brand was said to continue to exist, at least for the time being,
  

    [15]
   

  however, as of the winter of 2016 the brand had already been transitioned from the original "Withings Inspire Health" to "Withings Part of Nokia".
 
  On 23 December 2016 Withings products were pulled from the Apple Store for unclear reasons, allegedly, as an act of retaliation following the escalation of a patent dispute between Apple and Nokia.
  

    [16]
   


  On February 26th, 2017, it was announced that Withings is to be no more as a brand: its devices will be sold under the old Nokia brand, starting sometime in summer 2017.
  

    [17]
   


  The WiFi Body Scale measures both weight and
  
   fat mass
  
  and uploads the data to the company's site over
  
   Wi-Fi
  
  . The scale data can be accessed by
  
   Android
  
  ,
  
   BlackBerry
  
  , and
  
   iOS
  
  devices.
  

    [18]
   

  It also connects to various
  
   Health 2.0
  
  services such as
  
   Google Health
  


    [19]
   

  and
  
   Microsoft HealthVault
  


    [20]
   

  as well as diet and exercise sites such as
  
   DailyBurn
  
  .
  

    [21]
   

  It received tech media coverage for its ability to
  
   tweet
  
  the user's weight loss.
  

    [22]
   



    [23]
   



    [24]
   



    [25]
   


  First appearing in 2011, Blood Pressure Monitor was upgraded in March 2014 to a wireless version that connects through Bluetooth to both
  
   iOS
  
  and
  
   Android
  
  mobile devices.
  

    [26]
   

  Approved by the
  
   FDA
  
  , Blood Pressure Monitor is configured for wireless use, allowing patients to chart their blood pressure readings at home. The monitor measures systolic and diastolic
  
   blood pressure
  
  as well as
  
   heart rate
  
  .
  

    [27]
   


  This flip-open camera unit included dual microphones, a speaker, temperature and humidity sensors, and a nightlight with custom colors. The camera was configured via
  
   Bluetooth
  
  to operate via Withings'
  
   iOS
  
  or
  
   Android
  

   app
  
  , and send live video via the user's
  
   Wi-Fi
  
  network. In addition to letting the user watch video from the camera, pan, tilt, zoom, and take pictures as needed, the apps also notified the user of changing data from the monitor's sensors. The user could activate a push-to-talk mode or play a lullaby.
  

    [28]
   


  This product was discontinued in 2016.
 
  At the 2012
  
   Consumer Electronics Show
  
  in January, Withings unveiled the world's first Internet Connected Baby and Toddler Scale, which won a CES Innovations Award.
  

    [29]
   



    [30]
   

  The Smart Kid Scale features two weighing configurations: the first is for weighing infants with a removable baby basket, and the second is the toddler scale that emerges once the baby basket is removed. Parents can access their children's weight readings from any connected device.
  

    [31]
   


  The Withings Smart Body Analyzer is a smart scale that not only measures weight, but also calculates
  
   body mass index
  
  and
  
   fat mass
  
  , registers
  
   heart rate
  
  and indoor air quality/air temperature, and provides weather reports. The scale can store data for up to eight profiles at a time, recognizing users based on their weight. Measurements can be shared by text, email or social networking sites, such as
  
   Twitter
  
  .
  

    [32]
   


  The scale received media attention when magician
  
   Penn Jillette
  
  , having lost nearly 120 pounds in four months to preserve his health, attributed his success to a strict regimen and the Withings smart scale. While in hospital, Jillette recruited his friends to use the scale, creating "a kind of cult to see who could lose the most weight the most quickly." Jillette also relied on the Withings Wireless Blood Pressure Monitor.
  

    [33]
   



    [34]
   


  The Pulse O2 started selling in summer 2013. The product was upgraded in 2014 to include additional features such as the
  
   pulse oximetry
  
  measurement (SPO2) and the wear-it-your-way form factor, and the name was changed to Ox.
  

    [35]
   


  The Pulse contains a
  
   pedometer
  
  ,
  
   heart rate monitor
  
  and blood oxygen reader. It can connect to other Withings devices such as the Smart Body Analyzer smart scales and blood pressure monitor. The user's data is pulled from those devices and into the companion app. Information like the user's weight is then used to increase the accuracy of the Pulse
  
   calorie
  
  counter. When the Pulse is not at hand, activity can still be tracked through the companion app itself.
  

    [36]
   

  The Pulse is the only such device that does reflexive measurement, so users do not need to clip their finger for the SPO2 measurement.
  

    [18]
   


  Withings Aura is a smart
  
   alarm clock
  
  with sensors, a color-changing light, a speaker and an under-mattress sleep monitor. It has sleep programs to help
  
   induce sleep
  
  . The Aura also plays specially-engineered wake-up light and sound programs to gently wake the user. Throughout the night, it uses a
  
   sensor
  
  placed under the mattress to detect when the user is in the lightest
  
   sleep phase
  
  so it can wake them up at the most appropriate time before the alarm goes off.
  

    [37]
   


  When the Aura was presented at
  
   IFA
  
  2015,
  

    [38]
   

  the sensor was optional. It became the Aura Connected Alarm Clock without sensor and the Aura Total Sleep System with sensor.
 
  The device received an update in 2015 which allows integration with
  
   Spotify
  
  premium for users to stream their own music.
  

    [39]
   


  Withings Activité is an
  
   activity tracking
  
  watch with three models, ranging from stylish to sporty: Activité Sapphire (2014), Activité Steel (2015), and Activité Pop (2015). The watch has no buttons; instead, everything is controlled from the
  
   phone app
  
  , as the watch is compatible with both
  
   iPhone
  
  and
  
   Android
  
  . The watch automatically resets in new time zones. It can track the user's sleep, swimming, walking and running automatically. Sleep and activity are displayed on the app as graphs. The app offers competitions with friends, even with people who only have an iPhone and no fitness tracker. It also incorporates weight, heart rate, and body mass data from Withings’ wireless scales, like the Smart Body Analyzer. The app connects to
  
   MyFitnessPal
  
  for food tracking.
  

    [2]
   


  The Activité Steel is made of
  
   stainless steel
  
  with
  
   chrome
  
  hands and a
  
   silicone
  
  strap. The battery life of the Activité is up to eight months and the device is water resistant to 50 meters.
  

    [12]
   

  The Activité Sapphire is Swiss-made, with scratch-proof domed
  
   sapphire glass
  
  , stainless steel and French calf leather. The Activité Pop is constructed from a PVD-coated metal, features mineral glass and has a silicone strap.
  

    [40]
   


  The Activité Steel has been described as "a solid, stylish smartwatch that is less expensive than other, less fashionable fitness trackers."
  

    [41]
   

  One of the users of Activité is French president
  
   François Hollande
  
  .
  

    [42]
   


  This comprehensive home monitoring solution was first presented at CES in 2014.
  

    [43]
   


  The Home camera alerts the user to any motion or noise while out of the house. It also tracks the indoor air quality, notifying the user if dangerous levels of
  
   volatile organic compounds
  
  are detected. The camera can be used with the
  
   IFTTT
  

   app
  
  to create a number of recipes between connected services and the camera, such as turning it on when the user's phone is using
  
   geolocation
  
  or when the door is locked, or making it turn on the air purifier when bad air quality is detected. Parents can also use the Home as a baby monitor to report any motion or noise in a nursery, use two-way talk with their baby, or soothe the baby to sleep with music and an LED light sequence.
  

    [44]
   


  Withings Go (2016) is an
  
   activity tracker
  
  that can be clipped or hung on belts, or worn on the wrist with a silicone strap. It uses a replaceable battery that lasts eight months, is waterproof for swimming, and has an
  
   E Ink
  
  screen for always-on activity progress status (or, at a touch, the analog time).
  

    [45]
   

  Using the free Withings Health Mate
  
   iOS
  
  or
  
   Android
  

   app
  
  that keeps tabs on activity levels, users can also specify a target activity goal. Goal progress will be displayed on the tracker using a prominent circular countdown. The E Ink display also serves as a touch-sensitive button, letting users switch between activity goals and the watch function.
  

    [46]
   


  Withings Thermo is a
  
   temporal artery
  

   thermometer
  
  which uses a 16-
  
   sensor
  
  array to deliver fast and accurate temperature readings. In a non-invasive manner,
  
   infrared
  
  sensors take 4,000 measurements within two seconds, while an algorithm corrects for biases, such as skin heat loss and the ambient temperature, to produce a reliable single temperature reading.
  

    [47]
   

  The thermometer displays only the temperature, but additional data is stored, analyzed, and presented in the accompanying
  
   app
  
  . Its
  
   Wi-Fi
  
  and
  
   Bluetooth
  
  connectivity allows
  
   smartphone
  
  users to log readings, along with other information such as symptoms and medication.
  

    [48]
   

  The app stores profiles of several people and lasts on two batteries for about two years.
  

    [49]
   

  Thermo won two 2016
  
   CES
  
  Innovation Awards (Best in Fitness, Sport and Biotech, and Tech for a Better World).
  

    [47]
   


  This personal health coach connects with either the Activité or Activité Pop via
  
   Bluetooth low energy
  
  . It also connects with Go, Pulse, scales and BPM. Once the watch syncs with the app, users can view their sleep metrics and activity, and set a vibrating alarm. The Health Mate app shows activity and
  
   sleep
  
  trends over time in graphs. The app also tracks weight,
  
   heart rate
  
  , blood pressure and more if the user enters the data or owns Withings’ smart scale or blood pressure monitor.
  

    [50]
   

  Health Mate can be integrated with
  
   Apple Watch
  
  .
  

    [51]
   


  Within the Health Mate App, users can purchase Hy-Result, a protocol that helps users of home
  
   blood pressure monitors
  
  correctly interpret their results with personalized messages taking account of the user profile. Because blood pressure varies over time, Hy-Result takes three consecutive results, which can be shared with others.
  

    [52]
   


  Withings has received numerous awards for its products and innovations. They include the following:
 
  Withings Health Institute is the company's research body, dedicated to accelerating the connected health revolution through a combination of in-house research and academic partnerships.
  

    [62]
   

  Using real-time data, it tracks the extent to which key risk factors for
  
   heart disease
  
  are linked to lifestyle, such as
  
   sedentary behavior
  
  , overweight and obesity, and
  
   high blood pressure
  
  , and what steps can be taken to reduce risks.
  

    [63]
   

  The Institute has published several research papers on various topics, and Withings products have been involved in numerous clinical trials.
  

    [64]
   


  Direct competitors include
  
   Fitbit
  
  , with a range of activity trackers and an online app that can exchange data with Withings;
  

    [65]
   


   Misfit
  
  , specializing in wearable technology;
  

    [66]
   


   Garmin
  
  , best known for its
  
   GPS
  
  products;
  

    [66]
   


   Qardio
  
  , focusing on heart health monitoring products;
  

    [67]
   


   iHealth Labs
  
  , with an iPhone-connectible
  
   blood pressure monitor
  
  ;
  

    [68]
   


   Blipcare
  
  , which produces weight scales and blood pressure monitors that are not Bluetooth-based, but WiFi-enabled;
  

    [69]
   


   BodyTrace
  
  , with an Internet-connected scale which uses GSM rather than WiFi to connect to the Internet;
  

    [70]
   

  and
  
   Luvion
  
  premium babyproducts, a Dutch company specialised in (connected) baby monitors.
  

    [71]
   

