


   Aqua
  
  is the
  
   graphical user interface
  
  (GUI) and
  
   visual theme
  
  of
  
   Apple
  
  's
  
   macOS
  

   operating system
  
  . It was originally based around the theme of water, with droplet-like components and a liberal use of reflection effects and translucency. Its goal is to "incorporate color, depth, translucence, and complex textures into a visually appealing interface" in macOS applications.
  

    [2]
   

  At its introduction,
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  noted that "one of the design goals was when you saw it you wanted to lick it".
  

    [3]
   


  Aqua was first introduced at the 2000
  
   Macworld Conference & Expo
  
  in
  
   San Francisco
  
  . Its first appearance in a commercial product was in the July 2000 release of
  
   iMovie
  
  2, followed by
  
   Mac OS X 10.0
  
  the year after.
  

    [4]
   

  Aqua is the successor to
  
   Platinum
  
  , which was used in
  
   Mac OS 8
  
  ,
  
   Mac OS 9
  
  and
  
   Mac OS X Server
  
  1.2. The appearance of Aqua has changed frequently over the years, most recently with the release of
  
   OS X Yosemite
  
  in 2014 which introduced a
  
   flatter look
  
  and did away with the gel-like controls and metal-like components.
 

   Mac OS X 10.2 "Jaguar"
  
  brought flatter interface elements, such as new buttons and drop-down menus, as well as reducing the transparency to tone down the pinstripes in windows and menus. These trends continued in subsequent Mac OS X releases.
 
  In
  
   Mac OS X Panther
  
  , brushed metal was brought to the
  
   Finder
  
  . New buttons were made to appear sunken into their surroundings, following a general trend of more flattened interface elements in the operating system. The traditional pinstripes were replaced with a much subtler theme, most notably in the
  
   menu bar
  
  , and the use of transparency was again reduced (for example in the title bars of inactive windows).
  
   Tabs
  
  also changed; they were made flatter and the whole tab area was sunken rather than raised. Tab buttons were centered on the top border of the tab area. New icons appeared across the system, including a new flatter, glossier Finder icon and a new
  
   System Preferences
  
  icon.
  

    [5]
   



   Mac OS X Tiger
  
  brought more subtle changes, including the unified titlebar scheme.
  

    [6]
   

  Pinstripes were removed from the menu bar entirely and replaced with a glossy, white look. Tabs were altered to appear as normal segmented buttons. The Apple menu icon was toned down to a more matte appearance and the new
  
   Spotlight
  
  search utility was permanently bound to the very right of the menu bar in the same color and gradient of the Apple menu.
  

    [7]
   



   Mac OS X Leopard
  
  brought wide-ranging changes to Aqua. Aqua windows and "brushed metal" windows obtained the same metal-like, gray look, pin-striped backgrounds were removed entirely, toolbars and titlebars were fused into a whole, differences between active and inactive windows became more distinct through thicker drop shadows and a monochrome appearance of inactive windows, the color of the menubar was changed into gray with an optional semi-transparency look on capable Macs and the Dock obtained a 3D look with a reflective glass-like 'floor'. The
  
   Dock
  
  's design, when placed on the left or right side, changed to a black translucent background with a white border and rounded corners.
  
   Context menus
  
  had slightly-rounded corners and numerous icons were redesigned, including folder icons and
  
   System Preferences
  
  icons.
  

    [8]
   



   Mac OS X Snow Leopard
  
  made almost no changes to Aqua. Most notably, the context menu of Dock items changed from a solid white to a translucent black.
  

    [9]
   



   Mac OS X Lion
  
  introduced many changes inspired by
  
   iOS
  
  that persisted in OS X Mavericks as well as OS X Yosemite, although the latter changed the overall aesthetic. Scrollbars were removed and scrollbar handles turned into thin, semi-transparent bars that disappear when not used. The corner radii of push buttons were reduced, giving an appearance similar to
  
   Mac OS 8
  
  and
  
   9
  
  . The gel-like appearance of most components was replaced with a slightly glossy and flatter look. Window backgrounds became slightly brighter and window corners were rounded. Lion also added more animations.
  

    [10]
   



   OS X Mountain Lion
  
  brought only minor changes and changed the Dock's appearance into a frosted-glass style, with rounded corners, rectangular indicator lights, a new diagonal separator and a new Trash icon.
  

    [11]
   



   OS X Mavericks
  
  dispensed with several rich and ornamental designs, reflecting the design overhaul in
  

    iOS 7
   

  . The applications
  
   Calendar
  
  ,
  
   Contacts
  
  and
  
   Notes
  
  respectively lost their leather, book and notepad appearance (all introduced in Lion). Linen textures in Notification Center and Launchpad were removed as well and replaced with simple gray backgrounds.
  

    [12]
   


  In
  
   OS X Yosemite
  
  , many of the Aqua elements and icons were
  
   simplified
  
  and flattened, following a similar design change in
  
   iOS 7
  
  . Apple incorporated the same
  
   saturated
  

   frosted-glass
  
  effect, called "Vibrancy", across the system. Examples include: the Dock, the menubar, sidebars, Notification Center and
  
   Mission Control
  
  . A similar effect was applied to toolbars, but they maintained their gray appearance. Toolbar buttons became white and Apple introduced a compacter type of toolbar that removed the window title, but retained the toolbar buttons (for example,
  
   Safari
  
  ). Certain controls, such as checkboxes and radio buttons, gained animations, whereas animations in other places were removed, such as the "poof" animation when removing an icon from the Dock and the "cube" animation when fast-switching to another user account. Apple changed the system typeface into
  
   Helvetica Neue
  
  . Yosemite also added a 'dark theme' you can turn on in the settings which makes the dock and toolbar black
  

    [13]
   



   OS X El Capitan
  
  made only minor changes to Aqua. The white toolbar buttons regained a slightly glossy look, the
  
   spinning pinwheel
  
  was redesigned and the Vibrancy effect was reduced in certain areas, such as
  
   Mission Control
  
  . The system typeface was changed once more, into Apple's own
  
   San Francisco
  
  typeface, concurrent with
  

    iOS 9
   

  and following the typeface's release in
  
   watchOS
  
  in April 2015.
  

    [14]
   


  Aqua has also been embedded in Apple's applications for
  
   Microsoft Windows
  
  , such as
  
   iTunes
  
  ,
  
   QuickTime
  
  and
  
   Safari
  
  (although not in Safari 4). iTunes for Windows has generally adopted the same developments as the concurrent macOS version, with the exception of the use of native Windows user interface controls and Windows-style title bar buttons at the upper right of the player window. The Windows version of Safari, in version 3, included a functional Aqua look and feel that was very similar to macOS. As of version 4, a more Windows-like theme was employed using the standard Windows user interface controls and window border. QuickTime for Windows uses the same theme as seen in older versions of QuickTime for
  
   macOS
  
  , with brushed-metal windows and Aqua buttons on top.
 
  Gray, white and blue are the three principal colors which define the Aqua style. Window toolbars, window backgrounds, buttons, menus and other interface elements are all found in either of these colors. For instance, toolbars and sidebars are often grey or metal-colored, window backgrounds and popup menus are white and buttons (in older systems also scrollbar handles) are accented with a bright blue. In versions of
  
   OS X
  
  prior to OS X Yosemite, most controls have a "glass" or "gel" effect applied to them.
  
   David Pogue
  
  described this effect as "lickable globs of
  
   Crest Berrylicious Toothpaste Gel
  
  ".
  

    [15]
   


  macOS has few native customization options to change the overall look of the system. Users can choose a graphite appearance instead of the default blue one. When using the graphite appearance, controls have a
  
   slate
  
  -like, grey-blue or grey color, including the primary window controls which are red, yellow and green with the default appearance. The appearance option was added at the behest of developers and users who found the blue appearance garish or unprofessional.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

   OS X
  
  Yosemite added a dark mode that darkens the predominantly white menubar and Dock. Users can also freely choose a highlight color for text and file selection.
 
  Historically, Aqua had two window designs: the default Aqua windows and "brushed metal" windows. Aqua windows typically have a metal-like or gray titlebar with three buttons on the left side (for closing, minimizing and zooming or entering fullscreen mode). Visually, these buttons used to be placed on top, but later appeared 'sunken' into the window. Aqua windows have almost no frame or outside border, instead
  
   drop shadows
  
  are used to separate and distinguish active from inactive windows. The aesthetic of the window backgrounds changed from pin-striped to white backgrounds. Brushed-metal windows had a thick frame with a metallic texture or dark-gray background and sunken buttons and inner frames. They had the additional property of being draggable at every point of the frame instead of just the titlebar and toolbar. Apple recommended brushed-metal windows for applications that mimic real-world devices (such as
  
   iTunes
  
  ) or are used to interface with such devices (such as
  
   iSync
  
  ),
  

    [16]
   

  but was criticised by designers for not following its own guidelines or applying it inconsistently (it was also used in Safari or Finder).
  

    [17]
   

  Brushed-metal windows have been largely phased out since Leopard and become visually indistinctive from Aqua windows.
  

    [8]
   


  In addition to titlebars, windows can also have toolbars with separate buttons. Up to Leopard, toolbars were visually separated from the titlebar and had the same background as the window frame or were pin-striped.
  

    [7]
   

  Leopard introduced a unified style that extended the metal-like background of the titlebar to the toolbar, making it appear as one whole.
  

    [8]
   

  Optionally, a separator could be placed between the titlebar and the toolbar to mimic the previous style. OS X Yosemite brought a compacter version of the toolbar that fused the titlebar and toolbar together, made it shorter and removed the window title (for example, in Safari 8 and later).
  

    [13]
   


  Drawers are accessory
  
   sidebar
  
  views that can slide out from any edge of a window except the top edge. They can be resized perpendicular to their window edge but follow the window's size in the other direction. Drawers were once frequently used to display controls and information that did not need to be always visible, but Apple now recommends against their use.
  

    [18]
   


  Sheets are
  
   dialog boxes
  
  that are
  
   modal
  
  to a specific window. When opened, they are thrust towards the user like a sheet of paper, hence the name. They are partially transparent and focus attention on the content of the sheet. The parent window's controls are disabled until the sheet is dismissed, but the user is able to continue work in other windows (including those in the same application) while the sheet is open.
 
  Menus are backed with a slightly translucent solid gray, and when menu items are highlighted they appear blue. In
  
   application
  
  menus, which run in a single bar across the top of the
  
   screen
  
  , keyboard shortcuts appear to the right-hand side of the menu whilst the actual menu item is on the left. In Yosemite, the menus are much more translucent and have a blur effect.
 
  Drop down menus for use in windows themselves are also available in several varieties. The standard "pop up" menu is white with a blue end cap with opposing arrows, whilst 'pull down' menus only have one downward facing arrow in the end cap. 'Pull down' menus are available in four different Aqua varieties, most of which have fallen into disuse in later macOS releases.
 
  Text boxes are black on white text with a sunken effect border. In addition to regular square text boxes, rounded search text boxes are available . For more extensive text requirements, there is also a multi-line text field. A combined text box and pull down menu is available, which allows the user to type in a value in addition to choosing from a menu. There is also a combination textbox and picker control, which allows the user to type in a date and time or edit it with directional buttons.
  
   Mac OS X 10.4
  
  introduced a new interface element that allows the user to drag non-editable 'tokens' to a text box, between which text can be typed. Whitespace before and after the tokens is
  
   trimmed
  
  .
 
  Standard push buttons with rounded corners are available in two varieties: white and blue. A blue button is the default action, and will appear to pulse to prompt the user to carry out that action (In Yosemite, the default action buttons no longer pulse, they are simply colored blue). The action of a blue button can usually also be invoked with the
  
   return key
  
  . White buttons are usually associated with all other actions.
 
  Also available are rounded bevel buttons, designed to hold an icon; standard square buttons; glass square buttons and round buttons. In addition, circular, purple
  
   online help
  
  buttons are available which display help relative to the current task when clicked.
  
   Disclosure triangles
  
  , although technically buttons, allow views of controls to be shown and hidden to preserve space.
 
  In macOS, empty check boxes are small, white rounded rectangles. When they are checked, they turn blue and a
  
   checkmark
  
  is present. They are essentially buttons which can be toggled on or off. Radio buttons are similar in appearance and behaviour except they are circular and contain a dot instead of a check. Radio button are classed into groups of which only one can be activated at a time.
 
  In Yosemite, a short animation was added to show the checkbox or radio button filling in.
 
  Tables and lists can be broadly categorised in three ways: A standard multi-columnar table with space to enter values or place other interface elements such as buttons; An outline view that can contain disclosure triangles to show and hide sets of data; and a
  
   Miller columns
  
  view akin to the column view in the
  
   Finder
  
  . All table views can use alternating blue and white row backgrounds.
 
  Two main types of loading/saving progress indicator are available: a progress bar or a monochromatic spinning wheel (not the
  
   spinning pinwheel
  
  ). The progress bar itself is available in two varieties: indeterminate, which simply shows diagonal blue and white stripes in animation with no measure of progress; or determinate, which shows a blue pulsing bar against a white background proportional to the percentage of a task completed. The spinning wheel indicator, also found in the Mac OS X startup screen since version 10.2, is simply a series of 12 increasingly darker grey lines arranged circularly, like the side view of a
  
   spoked
  
  wheel rotating clockwise. Many other interfaces have adopted this device, including the
  
   Firefox
  
  and
  
   Camino
  
  web browsers and many
  
   Web 2.0
  
  -influenced web sites.
 
  In Yosemite, the progress bar was changed to a thin, light gray. The "indeterminate" variation kept the pulses, but slower and spaced out. A progress indicator now appears during boot, replacing the spinning wheel indicator found in earlier versions.
 
  Sliders are available in three types: one with tick marks and a triangular scrubber, one with a round scrubber and no tick marks and a circular slider which can be rotated. All are available horizontally or vertically. The circular slider is simply a gray dot on a white circle which can be rotated to set values.
 
  macOS has a standard control for picking colors which appears as a regular square button with a color sample in the middle. When clicked, it shows the standard macOS
  
   color palette
  
  .
 
  Tabs in macOS are nearly identical to push buttons, with the unselected tab(s) being white and the selected tab being blue. Image "wells" are also available: a small, sunken container into which image files can be dropped. When the well contains an image, it can display a thumbnail representation of the file's contents.
 
  Apple used
  
   Lucida Grande
  
  as the system typeface from the first release Cheetah to Mavericks. Occasionally, Apple also used
  
   Helvetica
  
  and
  
   Helvetica Neue
  
  , such as in applications like
  
   Mail
  
  and
  
   iPhoto
  
  . The system typeface was changed to Helvetica Neue in Yosemite and changed again in El Capitan into Apple's own
  
   San Francisco
  
  typeface. macOS makes use of system-wide typeface
  
   anti-aliasing
  
  to make edges appear smoother and preserve the distinct shapes of typefaces, sometimes at the cost of sharpness and clarity.
 
  Aqua makes heavy use of
  
   animation
  
  . Examples include:
 
  Many of these effects can be turned off by the user or are only available on supported hardware.
 
  Aqua is powered by the
  
   display server
  

   Quartz Compositor
  
  .
 
  Much of Aqua's original design resembled the translucent two-tone look of Apple's contemporary hardware.
  

    [20]
   

  In 2003 and 2004, Apple moved to the use of
  
   brushed aluminum
  
  in their industrial design (such as with the aluminum
  
   Apple Cinema Displays
  
  ). The design of Aqua changed accordingly. This somewhat inconsistent mix of interface styles has been controversial among the Mac community.
  

    [21]
   



    [22]
   



    [23]
   



    [24]
   



    [25]
   



    [26]
   



    [27]
   


  In the past, Apple has threatened legal action against those who make themes similar to their
  
   look and feel
  
  .
  

    [28]
   

  The Mac skinning community took exception to Apple's heavy-handed actions against all Aqua lookalikes.
  
   Stardock
  
  's
  
   Brad Wardell
  
  contrasted the company's litigious approach with
  
   Microsoft
  
  's approach to incorporating third-party skins into
  
   Windows XP
  
  .
  

    [29]
   

