


   Sir
  

   Jonathan Paul "Jony" Ive
  
  ,
  
   KBE
  
  (born 27 February 1967),
  

    [4]
   

  is a British
  
   industrial designer
  
  who is currently the
  
   Chief Design Officer
  
  (CDO) of
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  . While working for a design firm in London he was asked by Apple, then a struggling company, to create a look for a new laptop. He took the design to Apple and was hired immediately.
  

    [5]
   

  Ive oversees the Apple Industrial Design Group and also provides leadership and direction for Human Interface software teams across the company. Ive is the designer of many of Apple's products, including the
  
   MacBook Pro
  
  ,
  
   iMac
  
  ,
  
   MacBook Air
  
  ,
  
   Mac mini
  
  ,
  
   iPod
  
  ,
  
   iPod Touch
  
  ,
  
   iPhone
  
  ,
  
   iPad
  
  ,
  
   iPad Mini
  
  ,
  
   Apple Watch
  
  , and
  
   iOS
  
  .
 
  Ive has received a number of accolades for his work. In 2003 he was the inaugural winner of the
  
   Design Museum
  
  's Designer of the Year Award. In 2006, he was appointed as an honorary fellow of the
  
   Royal Academy of Engineering
  
  , and in 2012, he was
  
   knighted
  
  at Buckingham Palace for "services to design and enterprise".
  

    [6]
   

  In a 2004 BBC poll Ive was ranked the most influential person in
  
   British culture
  
  .
  

    [5]
   




  Ive was born in
  
   Chingford
  
  ,
  
   London
  
  , England. His father, Michael Ive, was a silversmith who lectured at
  
   Middlesex Polytechnic
  
  , and his grandfather was an engineer.
  

    [7]
   

  Ive attended the Chingford Foundation School, then
  
   Walton High School
  
  in Stafford. During his high school years, Ive was passionate about cars and it was this interest that led to his later career as a designer. Following graduation from Walton, Ive explored the option of studying car design in London, such as the course offered at the
  
   Royal College of Art
  
  ; however, he encountered a learning environment that was off-putting: "The classes were full of students making vroom! vroom! noises as they drew".
  

    [8]
   


  Ive studied industrial design at
  
   Newcastle Polytechnic
  
  . Items from his student portfolio, such as a hearing aid design, were exhibited at the
  
   Design Museum
  
  in London. Ive had been interested in drawing and making anything he could think of. Since he was a teenager, he was unsure of what area to specialise in after leaving Newcastle. After meeting with various design experts, he was drawn to product design. He was given employment at London design agency Roberts Weaver group, his college sponsor. Ive graduated with a
  
   first class
  

   Bachelor of Arts
  
  degree in 1989.
 
  Ive explained that his discovery of the
  
   Apple Mac
  
  , after "having a real problem with computers" during his later student years, was a turning point. Fearing he was "technically inept", he felt the Apple user experience was a departure from the computer design at that time
  

    [9]
   

  and was particularly impressed by the intuitive mouse-driven system.
  

    [10]
   


  After a year with Roberts Weaver, Jonathan Ive joined a London startup design agency called Tangerine,
  

    [1]
   

  located in
  
   Hoxton Square
  
  where he designed a diverse array of products, such as microwave ovens, toilets, drills and toothbrushes.
  

    [10]
   

  However, his frustration with the position reached a turning point after he designed a toilet, bidet and sink for client
  
   Ideal Standard
  
  , and the company's boss rejected Ive's work, stating that the products were too costly and looked too modern.
  

    [10]
   



    [11]
   

  Ive was unhappy working for clients whom he disliked and who didn't possess the same principles. Apple was a Tangerine client that Ive appreciated and he had been acting in a consultancy role for the computer firm while at Tangerine, creating the initial
  
   PowerBook
  
  designs. Apple had actually been attempting to recruit him as a full-time employee for two years without success.
  

    [10]
   


  Ive worked as a consultant for Apple's Chief of Industrial Design at the time,
  
   Robert Brunner
  
  , and eventually became a full-time Apple employee in 1992.
  

    [10]
   



    [12]
   

  He designed the second generation of the
  
   Newton
  
  , the
  
   MessagePad
  
  110, taking him by
  
   Taipei
  
  for the first time. Shortly before Jobs's return to Apple, Ive nearly resigned from the company.
  
   Jon Rubinstein
  
  , Ive's boss at the time, managed to retain Ive as an employee by explaining that Apple was "going to make history" following the revival of the company.
  

    [11]
   


  He became the Senior Vice President of Industrial Design in 1997 after the return of Jobs, and subsequently headed the industrial design team responsible for most of the company's significant hardware products.
  

    [13]
   

  Ive's first design assignment was the
  
   iMac
  
  ; it helped pave the way for many other designs such as the
  
   iPod
  
  and eventually the
  
   iPhone
  
  and the
  
   iPad
  
  .
  

    [14]
   

  Jobs made design a chief focus of the firm's product strategy, and Ive proceeded to establish the firm’s leading position with a series of functionally clean, aesthetically pleasing, and remarkably popular products. Ive explained the close rapport that existed in his working relationship with Jobs in 2014: "When we were looking at objects, what our eyes physically saw and what we came to perceive were exactly the same. And we would ask the same questions, have the same curiosity about things." Ive described Jobs as "so clever", with "bold" and "magnificent" ideas.
  

    [10]
   


  The work and principles of
  
   Dieter Rams
  
  , the chief designer at
  
   Braun
  
  from 1961 until 1995, influenced Ive's work. In
  
   Gary Hustwit
  
  's documentary film
  

    Objectified
   

  (2009), Rams says that Apple is one of only a handful of companies existing today that design products according to
  
   Rams' ten principles of "good design"
  
  .
  

    [15]
   



    [16]
   


  Ive runs his own laboratory at Apple, in which he oversees the work of his appointed design team, and he is the only Apple designer with a private office.
  

    [17]
   

  Only his core team — which consists of around 15 people from
  
   Britain
  
  ,
  
   America
  
  ,
  
   Japan
  
  ,
  
   Australia
  
  , and
  
   New Zealand
  
  (who have worked together for around two decades) — and top Apple executives are allowed into the laboratory, as it contains all of the concepts, including prototypes, that the design team is working on.
  

    [10]
   

  Ive also refuses to allow his children to enter the laboratory.
  

    [11]
   

  According to the Jobs biography, Ive's design studio contains foam-cutting and printing machines, while the windows are tinted. Jobs told biographer
  
   Walter Isaacson
  
  : "He has more operational power than anyone else at Apple except me."
  

    [18]
   


  On 29 October 2012, Apple announced that "Jony Ive will provide leadership and direction for Human Interface (HI) across the company in addition to his role as the leader of Industrial Design."
  

    [19]
   

  With the WWDC13 announcement of
  
   iOS 7
  
  and Ive's role as principal, the Apple Press information was also updated to reflect his new title: Senior Vice President of Design. The scheduled publication of an unofficial Ive biography was announced in late 2013. Written by
  
   Leander Kahney
  
  , who conducted interviews with former Apple designers and executives, the book is titled
  
   Jony Ive: The Genius Behind Apple's Greatest Products
  
  .
  

    [11]
   


  In March 2013,
  

    Time
   

  magazine published a feature interview with Ive, in which he revealed an optimistic view of his future with Apple:
 
   We are at the beginning of a remarkable time, when a remarkable number of products will be developed. When you think about technology and what it has enabled us to do so far, and what it will enable us to do in future, we’re not even close to any kind of limit. It’s still so, so new ... At Apple, there’s almost a joy in looking at your ignorance and realizing, ‘Wow, we’re going to learn about this and, by the time we’re done, we’re going to really understand and do something great.’ Apple is imperfect, like every large collection of people. But we have a rare quality. There is this almost pre-verbal, instinctive understanding about what we do, why we do it. We share the same values.
  
  In the same interview, Ive stated that he hopes that his best work is yet to emerge and that he prefers to be identified as a maker of products, rather than a designer. Ive believes that there is "a resurgence of the idea of craft" in 2014.
  

    [10]
   


  On 26 May 2015, Apple announced that Ive was promoted to the new role of Chief Design Officer.
  

    [20]
   

  Ive is one of only four
  
   C-level executives
  
  at Apple along with CEO
  
   Tim Cook
  
  , CFO
  
   Luca Maestri
  
  and COO
  
   Jeff Williams
  
  .
 
  He also serves as the narrator for most of Apple's product reveal videos.
 
  Ive married British writer and
  
   historian
  
  Heather Pegg in 1987, with whom he raises twin sons. Ive has been publicised as a very private and low-profile public figure. His family resides in the
  
   Pacific Heights
  
  district of
  
   San Francisco, California
  
  , US.
  

    [17]
   

  Ive avoids publicity and stated in March 2014 that Jobs was his "closest friend", a person he finds it "odd and tough to talk about", as "it doesn’t feel that long ago that he died". He also explained in 2014 that if his work at Apple ever became substandard, he would "make things for [himself], for [his] friends at home instead".
  

    [10]
   


   Steve Jobs
  
  considered Ive to be his "spiritual partner at Apple".
 
  Ive has designed products for charitable causes, including a
  
   Leica camera
  
  for a charity auction that set a world record auction price for a camera
  

    [21]
   

  and a
  
   Jaeger-LeCoultre
  
  sports watch—one of only three in the world—for an AIDS-charity auction.
  

    [10]
   

