



    Macworld
   

  is a web site dedicated to products and software of
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  , published by
  
   Mac Publishing
  
  , which is headquartered in
  
   San Francisco, California
  
  . It started life as a print magazine in 1984 and had the largest audited circulation (both total and newsstand) of Macintosh-focused magazines in
  
   North America
  
  , more than double its nearest competitor,
  

    MacLife
   

  (formerly
  
   MacAddict
  
  ).
  
   Macworld
  
  was founded by
  
   David Bunnell
  
  (publisher) and
  
   Andrew Fluegelman
  
  (editor). It was the oldest Macintosh magazine still in publication, until September 10, 2014, when
  
   IDG
  
  , its parent company, announced it was discontinuing the print edition and laid off most of the staff, while continuing an online version.
  

    [1]
   




  In 1997, the publication was renamed to
  
   Macworld, incorporating MacUser
  
  (a name reflected subtly on the magazine's Table of Contents page) to reflect the consolidation of the
  
   Ziff-Davis
  
  -owned
  

    MacUser
   

  magazine into the
  
   International Data Group
  
  -owned
  
   Macworld
  
  within the new Mac Publishing joint venture between the two publishers.
  

    [2]
   

  In 1999, the combined company also purchased the online publication
  
   MacCentral Online
  
  , because
  
   Macworld
  
  didn't have a powerful online news component at the time. In late 2001 International Data Group (IDG) bought out Ziff-Davis' share of Mac Publishing, making it a wholly owned subsidiary of IDG.
 
  The magazine was published in many countries, either by other IDG subsidiaries or by outside publishers who have licensed the brand name and its content. These editions included
  
   Australia
  
  ,
  
   Germany
  
  (
  
   Macwelt
  
  ),
  
   Italy
  
  ,
  
   Spain
  
  ,
  
   Sweden
  
  (
  
   MacWorld
  
  ),
  
   Turkey
  
  , the
  
   United Kingdom
  
  , the
  
   Netherlands
  
  and
  
   Indonesia
  
  . Its content was also incorporated into a number of other IDG publications.
 
  The magazine's publisher licenses its name to another IDG subsidiary,
  
   IDG World Expo
  
  , for the Macworld Conference & Expo (now
  
   Macworld/iWorld
  
  ), which takes place every January at the
  
   Moscone Convention Center
  
  in San Francisco.
 
  In addition to publishing a monthly print magazine,
  
   Macworld
  
  also operates numerous web sites, including Macworld (www.macworld.com), Playlist (www.playlistmag.com), MacUser (www.macuser.com), and Mac OS X Hints (www.macosxhints.com).
 
  Every year, Macworld uses its expertise in technology to find the best device in each category in the market.
 
  The Macworld Podcast is a weekly
  
   podcast
  
  published by Macworld, a magazine and web site devoted to
  
   Apple's
  

   Macintosh
  
  computers. It was formally hosted by Macworld Senior Editor
  
   Chris Breen
  
  , and consists mostly of interviews with
  
   Macworld
  
  editors and other Mac luminaries.
  
   Macworld
  
  editorial director
  
   Jason Snell
  
  is a frequent guest and occasional guest host. The program's original host was Cyrus Farivar.
 
  The Macworld Podcast began life on April 26, 2005 as the "Geek Factor Podcast", but was upgraded into the official "Macworld Podcast" with its fifth installment, in August 2005. Its current hosts as of August 2015 are Glenn Fleishman and Susie Ochs.
 