


   ID3
  
  is a
  
   metadata
  
  container most often used in conjunction with the
  
   MP3
  

   audio file format
  
  . It allows information such as the title, artist, album, track number, and other information about the file to be stored in the file itself.
 
  ID3 is also specified by
  
   Apple
  
  as a timed metadata in
  
   HTTP Live Streaming
  
  , carried as a
  
   PID
  
  in the main
  
   transport stream
  
  or in separate audio
  
   TS
  
  .
 
  There are two unrelated versions of ID3: ID3v1 and ID3v2. ID3v1 takes the form of a 128-
  
   byte
  
  segment at the end of an MP3 file containing a fixed set of data fields. ID3v1.1 is a slight modification which adds a "track number" field at the expense of a slight shortening of the "comment" field. ID3v2 is structurally very different from ID3v1, consisting of an extensible set of "frames" located at the start of the file, each with a frame identifier (a three- or four-byte string) and one piece of data. 83 types of frames are declared in the ID3v2.4 specification, and applications can also define their own types. There are standard frames for containing cover art, BPM, copyright and license, lyrics, and arbitrary text and URL data, as well as other things. Three versions of ID3v2 have been documented, each of which has extended the frame definitions.
 
  ID3 is a
  
   de facto standard
  
  for metadata in MP3 files; no standardization body was involved in its creation nor has such an organization given it a formal approval status.
  

    [1]
   

  It competes with the
  
   APE tag
  
  in this arena.
 


  The MP3 standard did not include a method for storing file metadata. In 1996 Eric Kemp had the idea to add a small chunk of data to the audio file, thus solving the problem. The method, now known as ID3v1, quickly became the
  
   de facto
  
  standard for storing metadata in MP3s.
  

    [2]
   

  The format was released by Damaged Cybernetics, an underground group that specialized in cracking console gaming systems. There was no identifying information for any of the cracked console ROMs,
  
   [
   


      clarification needed
     


   ]
  
  thus an ID tagging system was created to make tracking easier. Eric and associates carried this over into MP3 files. This format was used for a number of file formats unknown at that time.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  The ID3v1 tag occupies 128
  
   bytes
  
  , beginning with the string
  
   TAG
  
  128 bytes from the end of the file. The tag was placed at the end of the file to maintain compatibility with older
  
   media players
  
  . Some players would play a small burst of static when they read the tag, but most ignored it, and almost all modern players will correctly skip it. This tag allows 30 bytes each for the title, artist, album, and a "comment", four bytes for the year, and a byte to identify the
  
   genre
  
  of the song from a predefined list of 80 values (
  
   Winamp
  
  later extended this list to 148 values).
 
  One improvement to ID3v1 was made by Michael Mutschler in 1997. Since the comment field was too small to write anything useful, he decided to trim it by two bytes and use those two bytes to store the track number. Such tags are referred to as
  
   ID3v1.1
  
  .
  

    [2]
   


  Strings are either space- or zero-padded. Unset string entries are filled using an empty string. ID3v1 is 128 bytes long.
  

    [3]
   


  ID3v1 pre-defines a set of genres denoted by numerical codes. Winamp extended the list by adding more genres in its own music player, which were later adopted by others (though some are of dubious value: e.g. "Primus" is one specific band, not a genre, and "Negerpunk" appears to be a racist joke in Swedish). However, support for the extended Winamp list is not universal. In some cases, only the genres up to 125 are supported.
  

    [5]
   



    [6]
   


  The extended tag is an extra data block before an ID3v1 tag, which extends the title, artist and album fields to 60 bytes each, offers a freetext genre, a one-byte (values 0–5) speed and the start and stop time of the music in the MP3 file, e.g., for fading in. If none of the fields are used, it will be automatically omitted.
 
  Some programs supporting ID3v1 tags can read the extended tag, but writing may leave stale values in the extended block. The extended block is not an official standard, and is only supported by few programs, not including
  
   XMMS
  
  or Winamp. The extended tag is sometimes referred to as the "enhanced" tag.
 
  The extended tag is 227 bytes long, and placed before the ID3v1 tag.
 
  In 1998, a new specification called ID3v2 was created by multiple contributors.
  

    [7]
   

  Although it bears the name ID3, its structure is very different from ID3v1.
 
  ID3v2 tags are of variable size, and usually occur at the start of the file, to aid
  
   streaming media
  
  . They consist of a number of
  
   frames
  
  , each of which contains a piece of metadata. For example, the
  
   TIT2
  
  frame contains the title, and the
  
   WOAR
  
  frame contains the
  
   URL
  
  of the artist's website. Frames can be up to 16MB in length, while total tag size is limited to 256MB. The internationalization problem was solved by allowing the encoding of strings not only in
  
   ISO-8859-1
  
  , but also in
  
   Unicode
  
  .
 
  Textual frames are marked with an encoding byte.
  

    [8]
   


  However,
  
   mojibake
  
  is still common when using local encodings instead of Unicode. In particular, some Japanese editors are known to use
  
   Shift JIS
  
  encoding, which usually has disastrous effects: it will not work with any standard-compliant software regardless of local settings (since it is not supported by the standard), will not work outside Japan (since Shift JIS has very little support outside Japan), and will not even work on all Japanese computers even with a specifically non-compliant reader (as it is software-dependent and settings-dependent).
 
  There are 83 types of frames declared in the ID3v2.4 specification,
  

    [9]
   

  and applications can also define their own types. There are standard frames for containing cover art,
  

    BPM
   

  , copyright and license, lyrics, and arbitrary text and URL data, as well as other things. There are three versions of ID3v2:
 
  There is a loose
  
   de facto
  
  standard for implementation of song ratings. Most apps will display 0 to 5 stars for any given song, and how the stars are expressed can vary. For instance, when rating a song in
  
   iTunes
  
  , the rating is not embedded in the tag in the music file, but is instead stored in a separate database that contains all of the iTunes metadata. Other
  
   media players
  
  can embed rating tags in music files, but not necessarily the same way, so as a result a song which is rated on one media player sometimes won't display the rating the same way, or at all, when played on other software or mobile device.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  However, there is a "
  
   Popularimeter
  
  " frame in the ID3v2 specification meant for this purpose. The frame is called
  
   POPM
  
  and Windows Explorer, Windows Media Player,
  
   Winamp
  
  ,
  
   foobar2000
  
  ,
  
   MediaMonkey
  
  , and other software all map roughly the same ranges of 0–255 to a 0–5 stars value for display.
 
  The following list details how Windows Explorer reads and writes the POPM frame:
 
  Windows Explorer uses the following syntax:
 
  The 0 is the play counter portion of POPM as per the ID3v2 POPM specification, which is not to be confused or conflated with the PCNT frame, which is a separate frame meant entirely for playcounts. If an app supports granularity however, it should write 1 for one full star, and then 2–31 would be granular points under one full star. Notably, the ID string Windows uses is not an email address, as called for in the specifications. Further, Windows Explorer and Windows Media Player up to and including Windows 7 and WMP 12 (possibly beyond)
  
   [
   


      clarification needed
     


   ]
  
  contain a bug such that, if one were to use them to rate files, any
  
   Replay Gain
  
  tags one would have will be corrupted.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  WMP also writes the same values as described above, and reads the same way as well, EXCEPT for the cutoff between 4 and 5 stars, which is slightly different and basically of no consequence. WMP uses 221/222 instead, for
  
   reasons that are not clear
  
  .
 
  The ID3v2 Chapter Addendum was published in December 2005 but is not widely supported as yet. It allows users to jump easily to specific locations or chapters within an audio file and can provide a synchronized slide show of images and titles during playback. Typical applications include
  
   Enhanced podcasts
  
  and it can be used in ID3v2.3 or ID3v2.4 tags.
  

    [15]
   


  The metadata can also contain images of the following types:
  

    [16]
   



   Notes:
  

  Version 2.4 of the specification prescribes that all text fields (the fields that start with a
  
   T
  
  , except for TXXX) can contain multiple values separated by a
  
   null character
  
  . The null character varies by
  
   character encoding
  
  .
 
  ID3 tags may be edited in a variety of ways. On some platforms the file's properties may be edited by viewing extended information in the
  
   file manager
  
  . Additionally most
  
   audio players
  
  allow editing single or groups of files. Editing groups of files is often referred to as "batch tagging". There are also specialized applications, called
  
   taggers
  
  , which concentrate specifically on editing the tags and related tasks. Some, such as
  
   puddletag
  
  offer advanced features such as advanced batch tagging or editing based on
  
   regular expressions
  
  .
 
  ID3 tags were designed with MP3 in mind, so they would work without problems with MP3 and
  
   MP3Pro
  
  files. However, the tagsets are an independent part of the MP3 file and should be usable elsewhere. In practice, the only other formats which widely uses ID3v2 tags are
  
   AIFF
  
  and
  
   WAV
  
  . In AIFF the tag is stored inside an
  
   IFF
  
  chunk named "ID3". Windows media
  
   ASF
  
  files (
  
   WMA
  
  ,
  
   WMV
  
  ) have their own tagging formats but also support ID3 Tags embedded as attributes.
  

    [18]
   



   MP4
  
  also allows the embedding of an ID3 tag,
  

    [19]
   

  and this is widely supported, especially in Apple's iTunes, which uses MP4 standards in its audio and video file formats. Apple also uses ID3 tags to provide a
  
   Parental Advisory
  
  or Clean Version (
  
   radio edit
  
  ) rating for audio tracks or music videos bought on the
  
   iTunes Store
  
  .
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  Other container-based formats use their own tagging formats. An example of this is
  
   Ogg
  
  , which uses
  
   Vorbis comments
  
  . Adding ID3 tags to these would break the container structure. Earlier versions of
  
   Winamp
  
  such as 2.xx have been proven able to add ID3v1 and ID3v2 tags to MP1 and MP2 files.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
