


   Gracenote, Inc.
  
  provides music, video and sports
  
   metadata
  
  and automatic content recognition (ACR) technologies to entertainment services and brands in the
  
   United States
  
  and internationally.
  

    [3]
   

  Gracenote provides music recognition technologies that compare digital music files to a worldwide database of music information, enabling digital audio devices to identify the songs. The company licenses its technologies to developers of consumer electronics devices and online media players, who integrate the technologies into media players, home and car stereos, and digital music devices.
  

    [2]
   

  The company operates five business verticals: Music, Video, Sports, Automotive and Video Personalization. Headquartered in
  
   Emeryville, California
  
  , the company employs approximately 1,700 people in 20 offices around the world. Gracenote is now a Nielsen company.
 
  Gracenote is best known for MusicID, a music recognition solution that identifies compact discs and delivers artist metadata and cover art to the desktop. The Gracenote database includes music genre and mood information, TV show descriptions, episode information and channel line-ups, movie cast and crew information and sports statistics and results. Companies including music services, TV providers, consumer electronics manufacturers and automakers use Gracenote data to power their content recognition, universal search, navigation, linking, discovery and personalized recommendations functionalities.
 
  Formerly
  
   CDDB
  
  (Compact Disc Data Base), Gracenote maintains and licenses an Internet-accessible database containing information about the contents of audio
  
   compact discs
  
  and vinyl records. It provides software and
  
   metadata
  
  to businesses that enable their customers to manage and search digital media. Gracenote provides its media management technology and global media database of digital entertainment information to the
  
   mobile
  
  , automobile,
  
   portable
  
  , home, and
  
   PC
  
  markets. Several computer software applications that were capable of playing CDs, for example
  
   Media Go
  
  and
  
   iTunes
  
  , used Gracenote's
  
   CDDB
  
  technology.
  
   Winamp
  
  , once a major licensee, no longer has access to Gracenote; the legacy media player program lost access to Gracenote when
  
   SHOUTcast
  
  and Winamp were sold by AOL in 2014.
  

    [4]
   

  Redevelopment of Winamp continues by its new owner
  
   Radionomy
  
  who have said that future Winamp versions will have access to an online music database.
  

    [5]
   

  In 2014
  
   Tribune Media Company
  
  bought Gracenote from
  
   Sony Corporation of America
  
  .
  

    [2]
   

  In December 2016, Tribune announced that it had reached an agreement to sell Gracenote to
  
   Nielsen Holdings, PLC.
  
  for $560 million.
  

    [6]
   

  The purchase was completed on February 1, 2017.
 


  Gracenote began in 1993 as an open-source project involving a CD player program named xmcd and an associated database named CDDB. xmcd and CDDB were created by Ti Kan and Steve Scherf. Because CDs do not contain any digitally-encoded information about their contents, Kan and Scherf devised a technology which identifies and looks up CDs based on TOC information stored at the beginning of each disc. A TOC, or Table of Contents, is a list of offsets corresponding to the start of each track on a CD. Its original database was created from and continues to receive voluntary contributions from users. This led to a
  
   licensing controversy
  
  when Gracenote became commercialized.
 
  On April 22, 2008,
  
   Sony
  
  announced that it would acquire Gracenote for $260 million.
  

    [7]
   

  The acquisition was completed on June 2, 2008.
  

    [8]
   


  On September 9, 2010 Gracenote received its one billionth piece of data, with a submission about the
  
   Compact Disc
  
  release of
  
   Swans
  
  '
  

    My Father Will Guide Me Up a Rope to the Sky
   

  .
  

    [9]
   


  On December 23, 2013, Sony announced it would sell Gracenote to
  
   Tribune Media
  
  for $170 million. The acquisition closed in February 2014: Gracenote was aligned with the
  
   Tribune Media Services
  
  division which focused on TV and Movie metadata and IDs.
  

    [10]
   



    [11]
   


  On June 12, 2014,
  
   Tribune Media Services
  
  merged with Gracenote to form one company under the Gracenote name.
  

    [12]
   


  On July 9, 2014, Tribune Media Company purchased What’s-ON, a provider of TV data and advanced search offerings covering India and the Middle East for $27 million. This acquisition expanded Gracenote’s international video data footprint and brought key recommendation technology into its IP portfolio.
  

    [13]
   


  On September 3, 2014, Gracenote acquired
  
   Baseline
  
  , a Los-Angeles based provider of film and TV data and information. Baseline had previously been owned by the
  
   NY Times
  
  from 2006-2011 after which it was sold back to its original owners. This $50 million purchase deepened Gracenote’s existing video datasets and added the Studio System database, a subscription-based resource for the Hollywood content creation and distribution communities, to its line-up of offerings.
  

    [14]
   


  On October 2, 2014, Gracenote purchased Australia-based TV and movie data company HWW for $19 million US to expand its Asia Pacific presence and international offerings.
  

    [15]
   


  On May 28, 2015, Gracenote launched a new Sports vertical based on the $54 million acquisitions of Amsterdam-based Infostrada Sports and Halifax-based SportsDirect. This enabled the company to become a major provider of music, video and sports data on a global scale.
  

    [16]
   


  In December 2016, Tribune Media announced that it was selling Gracenote to the Nielsen Company.
  

    [17]
   

  The deal officially closed on February 1, 2017.
  

    [18]
   


  With the acquisition by Tribune Media in 2014 and subsequent acquisitions of What’s-ON, HWW, Baseline, SportsDirect, and Infostrada Sports, Gracenote has expanded its core data product beyond Music into Video and Sports.
 
  Gracenote's early product line-up consisted of MusicID, Mobile MusicID, Music Enrichment, Discover, Playlist, Playlist Plus, Media VOCS, Classical Music Initiative, and Link. In April 2007, Gracenote launched the first
  

    [19]
   

  legal lyrics offering in the U.S. that was sold to
  
   LyricFind
  
  in 2013.
 
  Gracenote’s current Music offerings fall into three major categories: Music Recognition, Music Data and Music Discovery. Its Music Recognition product called MusicID® was originally developed as a CD track-identification system. Gracenote also operates a digital file identification service which uses audio fingerprinting technology to identify digital music files such as MP3s and deliver track level metadata, album art and links to complementary content and services. Its Music Data offering provides information describing Genre, Mood, Era, Origin and Tempo for tens of millions of songs. Its Music Discovery product called Rhythm™ delivers solutions enabling personalized playlist and radio station creation.
  

    [20]
   



    [21]
   


  Gracenote Auto puts Automatic Content Recognition (ACR) technology into the car’s audio system to identify music playing from various sources including AM/FM and satellite radio, CDs or streaming services and deliver relevant metadata and cover art. In December 2015, Gracenote launched its first audio technology, Gracenote Dynamic EQ, designed to help automakers and OEMs automatically tune connected car audio systems to the optimal equalizer settings for individual songs based on genre, mood and release date.
  

    [22]
   


  Gracenote’s Video platform called On Entertainment™ consists of TV listings and schedules for approximately 85 countries and 35 languages as well as TV and Movie data and related-imagery information for six million TV shows and movies. On Entertainment is supported by standardized TMS IDs for TV shows, movies and celebrities. These IDs enable universal search across linear TV, OTT and VOD libraries and make possible “season pass” DVR recordings.
 
  Gracenote Sports provides live scores, play-by-play data, historical results and records, schedules, player profiles and athlete biographies for 4,500 leagues and competitions such as the NFL, MLB, NBA, NHL, Premier League, F1, Bundesliga, Tour de France, Wimbledon and the Olympics. Gracenote’s Podium product tracks all Olympic competition results and rankings at elite and junior levels as well as historical Olympic data going back to the very first modern games in 1896. In September 2015, the company announced DVR Extend which enables TV providers to dynamically adjust DVR settings to ensure live sports game recordings don’t get cut off in the event they go past scheduled broadcast times.
  

    [23]
   



   iTunes
  
  ,
  
   Media Go
  
  and
  
   Sonicstage
  
  all use Gracenote's CD track identification services.
  

    [24]
   



    [25]
   



    [26]
   


  In addition, Gracenote provides its products to a number of other services, including
 
  In 1998, CDDB was purchased by
  
   Escient
  
  , a consumer electronics manufacturer, and operated as a business unit within the Indiana-based company. CDDB was then spun out of Escient and in July 2000 was renamed Gracenote. The CDDB database license was later changed to include new terms. For instance, any programs using a CDDB lookup had to display a CDDB logo while performing the lookup. Then, in March 2001, only licensed applications were provided access to the Gracenote database. New licenses for CDDB1 (the original version of CDDB) were no longer available, so programmers using Gracenote services were required to switch to CDDB2 (a new version incompatible with CDDB1).
 
  This has been controversial, as the original CDDB database was created out of anonymous contributions, initially via the
  
   Open Source
  
  xmcd CD player program. Many listing contributors believed that the database was open-source as well, because in 1997, cddb.com's download and support pages had said it was released under the GPL. CDDB claims that license grant was an error.
 