

  A
  
   podcast
  
  is an
  
   episodic
  
  series of
  
   digital media
  

   files
  
  which a user can set up so that new episodes are automatically
  
   downloaded
  
  via
  
   web syndication
  
  to the user's own local computer or
  
   portable media player
  
  .
  

    [1]
   


  The word arose as a
  
   portmanteau
  
  of "
  
   iPod
  
  " (a brand of media player) and "
  
   broadcast
  
  ". Thus, the files distributed are typically in
  
   audio
  
  or
  
   video
  
  formats, but may sometimes include other file formats such as
  
   PDF
  
  or
  
   ePub
  
  .
 
  The distributor of a podcast maintains a central list of the files on a
  
   server
  
  as a
  
   web feed
  
  that can be accessed through the
  
   Internet
  
  . The listener or viewer uses special
  
   client
  

   application
  

   software
  
  on a computer or media player, known as a
  
   podcatcher
  
  , which accesses this web feed, checks it for updates, and downloads any new files in the series. This process can be automated so that new files are downloaded automatically, which may seem to the user as though new episodes are broadcast or "
  
   pushed
  
  " to them. Files are stored locally on the user's device, ready for
  
   offline
  
  use.
  

    [2]
   



    [3]
   

  Podcasting contrasts with
  
   webcasting
  
  or
  
   streaming
  
  which do not allow for offline listening, although most podcasts may also be streamed on demand as an alternative to download. Many podcast players (apps as well as dedicated devices) allow listeners to adjust the playback speed.
 
  Some have labeled podcasting as a
  
   converged medium
  
  bringing together audio, the web, and
  
   portable media players
  
  , as well as a
  
   disruptive technology
  
  that has caused some people in the radio business to reconsider established practices and preconceptions about audiences, consumption, production, and distribution.
  

    [4]
   

  Podcasts are usually free of charge to listeners and can often be created for little to no cost, which sets them apart from the traditional model of "
  
   gate-kept
  
  " media and production tools.
  

    [4]
   

  It is very much a horizontal media form: producers are consumers, consumers may become producers, and both can engage in conversations with each other.
  

    [4]
   




  "Podcast" is a
  
   portmanteau
  
  , invented by BBC journalist
  
   Ben Hammersley
  
  in 2004,
  

    [5]
   

  of the words "pod" — from
  
   iPod
  
  , a popular brand of portable media player produced by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  — and "
  
   broadcast
  
  ".
  

    [6]
   

  Despite the etymology, the content can be accessed using any computer or similar device that can play media files. Use of the term "podcast" predated Apple's addition of formal support for podcasting to the iPod, or to Apple's
  
   iTunes
  
  software.
  

    [7]
   


  Other names for podcasting include "net cast", intended as a vendor-neutral term without the loose reference to the Apple iPod. The name is used by shows from the
  
   TWiT.tv
  
  network.
  

    [8]
   

  Some sources have suggested the
  
   backronym
  
  "portable on demand" for "POD", for similar reasons.
  

    [9]
   


  Many people and groups, including Dawn and Drew of
  

    The Dawn and Drew Show
   

  , Kris and Betsy Smith of
  
   Croncast
  
  , and
  
   Dan Klass
  
  of
  
   The Bitterest Pill
  
  contributed to the early emergence and popularity of podcasts.
  

    [10]
   

  Former
  
   MTV
  

   VJ
  

   Adam Curry
  
  , in collaboration with
  
   Dave Winer
  
  , a developer of
  
   RSS
  
  feeds, is credited with coming up with the idea to automate the delivery and syncing of textual content to portable audio players.
  

    [11]
   



    [12]
   



    [13]
   


  Podcasting, once an obscure method of spreading information, has become a recognized medium for distributing audio content, whether for corporate or personal use. Podcasts are similar to
  
   radio programs
  
  , but they are audio files. Listeners can play them at their convenience, using devices that have become more common than portable broadcast receivers.
 
  The first application to make this process feasible was iPodderX, developed by August Trometer and Ray Slakinski.
  

    [14]
   

  By 2007, audio podcasts were doing what was historically accomplished via radio broadcasts, which had been the source of radio talk shows and news programs since the 1930s.
  

    [13]
   

  This shift occurred as a result of the evolution of internet capabilities along with increased consumer access to cheaper hardware and software for audio recording and editing.
 
  In August 2004, Adam Curry launched his show
  

    Daily Source Code
   

  . It was a show focused on chronicling his everyday life, delivering news and discussions about the development of podcasting, as well as promoting new and emerging podcasts.
  
   Daily Source Code
  
  is believed to be the first podcast produced on a consistent basis. Curry published it in an attempt to gain traction in the development of what would come to be known as podcasting and as a means of testing the software outside of a lab setting. The name
  
   Daily Source Code
  
  was chosen in the hope that it would attract an audience with an interest in technology.
  

    [15]
   



   Daily Source Code
  
  started at a grassroots level of production and was initially directed at podcast developers. As its audience became interested in the format, these developers were inspired to create and produce their own projects and, as a result, they improved the code used to create podcasts. As more people learned how easy it was to produce podcasts, a community of pioneer podcasters quickly appeared.
  

    [16]
   

  Despite a lack of a commonly accepted identifying name for the medium at the time of its creation,
  
   Daily Source Code
  
  is commonly believed to be the first podcast to be published online.
 
  In June 2005,
  
   Apple
  
  released
  
   iTunes
  
  4.9 which added formal support for podcasts, thus negating the need to use a separate program in order to download and transfer them to a mobile device. While this made access to podcasts more convenient and widespread, it also effectively ended advancement of podcatchers by independent developers. Additionally, Apple issued
  
   Cease and Desist
  
  orders to many podcast application developers and service providers for using the term "iPod" or "Pod" in their products' names.
  

    [17]
   


  Within a year, many podcasts from public radio networks like the
  
   BBC
  
  ,
  
   CBC Radio One
  
  ,
  
   National Public Radio
  
  , and
  
   Public Radio International
  
  placed many of their radio shows on the iTunes platform. In addition, major local radio stations like
  
   WNYC
  
  in New York City and
  
   WHYY-FM
  
  radio in Philadelphia,
  
   KCRW
  
  in Los Angeles placed their programs on their websites and later on the iTunes platform.
 
  Concurrently,
  
   CNET
  
  ,
  
   This Week in Tech
  
  , and later
  
   Bloomberg Radio
  
  , the
  
   Financial Times
  
  , and other for-profit companies provided podcast content, some using podcasting as their only distribution system.
 
  On February 10 – 25 March 2005, Shae Spencer Management, LLC of
  
   Fairport, New York
  
  filed a trademark application to register the term "podcast" for an "online prerecorded radio program over the internet". On September 9, 2005, the
  
   United States Patent and Trademark Office
  
  rejected the application, citing
  
   Wikipedia
  
  's podcast entry as describing the history of the term. The company amended their application in March 2006, but the USPTO rejected the amended application as not sufficiently differentiated from the original. In November 2006, the application was marked as abandoned.
  

    [18]
   


  As of September 20, 2005, known trademarks that attempted to capitalize on podcast included: ePodcast, GodCast, GuidePod, MyPod, Pod-Casting, Podango, PodCabin, Podcast, Podcast Realty, Podcaster, PodcastPeople, Podgram PodKitchen, PodShop, and Podvertiser.
  

    [19]
   


  By February 2007, there had been 24 attempts to register trademarks containing the word "PODCAST" in the United States, but only "PODCAST READY" from
  
   Podcast Ready, Inc.
  
  was approved.
  

    [20]
   


  On September 26, 2004, it was reported that
  
   Apple
  
  had started to crack down on businesses using the string "POD", in product and company names. Apple sent a
  
   cease and desist
  
  letter that week to Podcast Ready, Inc., which markets an application known as "myPodder".
  

    [21]
   

  Lawyers for Apple contended that the term "pod" has been used by the public to refer to Apple's music player so extensively that it falls under Apple's trademark cover.
  

    [22]
   

  Such activity was speculated to be part of a bigger campaign for Apple to expand the scope of its existing
  
   iPod
  
  trademark, which included trademarking "IPOD", "IPODCAST", and "POD".
  

    [23]
   

  On November 16, 2006, the Apple Trademark Department stated that Apple does not object to third-party usage of "the generic term" "podcast" to refer to podcasting services and that Apple does not license the term. However, no statement was made as to whether or not Apple believed they held rights to it.
  

    [24]
   



   Personal Audio
  
  , a company referred to as a "
  
   patent troll
  
  " by the
  
   Electronic Frontier Foundation
  
  ,
  

    [25]
   

  filed a patent on podcasting in 2009 for a claimed invention in 1996.
  

    [26]
   

  In February 2013, Personal Audio started suing high-profile podcasters for royalties,
  

    [25]
   

  including
  

    The Adam Carolla Show
   

  and the
  

    HowStuffWorks
   

  podcast. US Congressman
  
   Peter DeFazio
  
  's previously proposed "SHIELD Act" intends to curb patent trolls.
  

    [27]
   


  In October 2013, the
  
   Electronic Frontier Foundation
  
  filed a petition with the US Trademark Office to invalidate the Personal Audio patent.
  

    [28]
   


  On August 18, 2014, the Electronic Frontier Foundation announced that Adam Carolla had settled with Personal Audio.
  

    [29]
   


  On April 10, 2015, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office invalidated five provisions of Personal Audio's podcasting patent.
  

    [30]
   


  An
  

    enhanced podcast
   

  can display images synchronized with audio. These can contain chapter markers,
  
   hyperlinks
  
  , and artwork, all of which is synced to a specific program or device. When an enhanced podcast is played within its specific program or device, all the appropriate information should be displayed at the same time and in the same window, making it easier to display materials.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  A
  

    podcast novel
   

  (also known as a
  

    serialized audiobook
   

  or
  

    podcast audiobook
   

  ) is a
  
   literary
  
  format that combines the concepts of a podcast and an
  
   audiobook
  
  . Like a traditional
  
   novel
  
  , a podcast novel is a work of long literary fiction; however, this form of the novel is recorded into episodes that are delivered online over a period of time and in the end available as a complete work for download. The episodes may be delivered automatically via
  
   RSS
  
  , through a website, blog, or another syndication method. These files are either listened to directly on a user's computer or loaded onto a portable media device to be listened to later.
 
  The types of novels that are podcasted vary from new works from new authors that have never been
  
   printed
  
  ,
  

    [31]
   



    [32]
   

  to well-established authors that have been around for years,
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  to classic works of literature that have been in print for over a century.
  

    [33]
   



    [34]
   

  In the same style as an
  
   audiobook
  
  , podcast novels may be elaborately narrated with separate voice actors for each character and sound effects, similar to a
  
   radio play
  
  . Other podcast novels have a single narrator reading the text of the story with little or no sound effects.
 
  Podcast novels are distributed over the
  
   Internet
  
  , commonly on a
  
   weblog
  
  . Podcast novels are released in episodes on a regular schedule (e.g., once a week) or irregularly as each episode is released when completed. They can either be downloaded manually from a website or blog or be delivered automatically via
  
   RSS
  
  or another method of syndication. Ultimately, a serialized podcast novel becomes a completed
  
   audiobook
  
  .
  

    [35]
   


  Some podcast novelists give away a free podcast version of their book as a form of promotion.
  

    [36]
   

  Some such novelists have even secured publishing contracts to have their novels printed.
  

    [31]
   



    [32]
   

  Podcast novelists have commented that podcasting their novels lets them build audiences even if they cannot get a publisher to buy their books. These audiences then make it easier to secure a printing deal with a publisher at a later date. These podcast novelists also claim the exposure that releasing a free podcast gains them makes up for the fact that they are giving away their work for free.
  

    [37]
   


  A
  

    video podcast
   

  (sometimes shortened to "
  
   vodcast
  
  ") includes
  
   video clips
  
  .
  
   Web television
  
  series are often distributed as video podcasts.
 


    Dead End Days
   

  (2003–2004) is commonly believed to be the first video podcast. That serialized
  
   dark comedy
  
  about zombies was broadcast from 31 October 2003 through 2004.
  

    [38]
   


  Since the spread of the
  
   Internet
  
  and the use of Internet broadband connection
  
   TCP
  
  , which helps to identify various applications, a faster connection to the Internet has been created and a wide amount of communication has been created. Video podcasts have become extremely popular online and are often presented as short video clips, usually excerpts of a longer recording. Video clips are being used on pre-established websites, and increasing numbers of websites are being created solely for the purpose of hosting video clips and podcasts. Video podcasts are being streamed on intranets and extranets, and private and public networks, and are taking communication through the Internet to whole new levels.
  

    [39]
   


  Most video clips are now submitted and produced by individuals.
  
   [
   


      not specific enough to verify
     


   ]
  
  Video podcasts are also being used for web television, commonly referred to as Web TV, a rapidly growing genre of digital entertainment that uses various forms of
  
   new media
  
  to deliver to an audience both reruns of shows or series and content created or delivered originally online via broadband and mobile networks, web television shows, or web series. Examples include
  
   Amazon
  
  ,
  
   Hulu
  
  , and
  
   Netflix
  
  . Other types of video podcasts used for web television may be short-form, anywhere from 2–9 minutes per episode, typically used for advertising, video blogs, amateur filming, journalism, and convergence with traditional media.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  Video podcasting is also helping build businesses, especially in the sales and marketing sectors. Through video podcasts, businesses both large and small can advertise their wares and services in a modern, cost-effective way. In the past, big businesses had better access to expensive studios where sophisticated advertisements were produced, but now even the smallest businesses can create high-quality media with just a camera, editing software, and the Internet.
  

    [40]
   


  An
  
   oggcast
  
  is a podcast recorded and distributed exclusively in the
  
   Ogg vorbis
  
  audio codec and/or other similarly free codecs.
  

    [41]
   

  For example, a podcast distributed both in the non-free
  
   MP3
  
  format and the free Ogg Vorbis format would not technically meet the definition of an oggcast. In contrast, a podcast distributed in both the Ogg Vorbis and
  
   Speex
  
  codecs would meet the strict definition of an oggcast. The term oggcast is a combination of the word "ogg" from the term Ogg Vorbis, and the syllable "cast", from "broadcast".
 
  The exact timeline of the term oggcast is uncertain. However,
  

    The Linux Link Tech Show
   

  , one of the longer running Linux podcasts still in production, has a program in the Ogg Vorbis format in its archives from January 7, 2004.
  

    [42]
   

  Given that a stable release of Ogg Vorbis did not appear until July 19, 2002,
  

    [43]
   

  it is very likely that the term oggcast was coined sometime between 2002 and 2004.
 
  Oggcasters tend to be broadcasters who prefer not to use audio and video codecs that have patent and/or licensing restrictions, such as the
  
   MP3
  
  codec.
  

    [41]
   


  Recording and distributing podcasts in the Ogg Vorbis audio format has advantages.
  
   Mozilla
  

   Firefox
  
  and
  
   Google Chrome
  
  web browsers both support playing Ogg Vorbis files directly in the browser without requiring plugins.
  

    [44]
   



    [45]
   

  Ogg Vorbis may produce better audio quality with a smaller file size than alternative codecs such as
  
   AAC
  
  or MP3.
  

    [46]
   

  However, this has not been proven conclusively. Ogg Vorbis is not bound by patents and is considered "free software" in the sense that no corporate entity owns the rights to the format. Some people feel that this is a safer container for their multimedia content for this reason.
  

    [47]
   

  However, Oggcasters can generally not reach as wide of an audience as more traditional podcasters. This is mainly due to the lack of native Ogg Vorbis support in
  
   Microsoft
  
  's
  
   Internet Explorer
  
  and Apple's
  
   Safari web browser
  
  , and the lack of Ogg Vorbis support in many mobile audio devices.
  

    [48]
   


  Oggcast planet maintains a central list of oggcasts.
  

    [49]
   


  A
  
   political podcast
  
  focuses on current events, lasts usually a half hour to an hour, often with a relaxed and conversational tone, and features journalists and politicians and pollsters and writers and others with credentials in the
  
   public sphere
  
  . Most political podcasts have a host-guest interview format and are broadcast each week based on the news cycle. Political podcasts have blossomed in the past few years in the
  
   United States
  
  because of the long election cycle.
  

    [50]
   



    [51]
   


  Communities use collaborative podcasts to support multiple contributors podcasting through generally simplified processes, and without having to host their own individual feeds. A community podcast can also allow members of the community (related to the podcast topic) to contribute to the podcast in many different ways. This method was first used for a series of podcasts hosted by the Regional Educational Technology Center at
  
   Fordham University
  
  in 2005.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

   Gronstedt
  
  explores how businesses like IBM and EMC use podcasts as an employee training and communication channel.
  

    [52]
   



    [53]
   



