

  The
  
   Apple Remote
  
  is a
  
   remote control
  
  device released in or after October 2005 by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  for use with a number of its products which use
  
   infrared
  
  capabilities. The device was originally designed to interact with the
  
   Front Row
  
  media program on the iSight
  
   iMac G5
  
  and is compatible with some later desktop and portable Macintosh computers. The first three generations of
  
   Apple TV
  
  used the Apple Remote as their primary control mechanism. It has now been replaced with the
  
   Siri Remote
  
  in the fourth generation. Prior to the Apple Remote, Apple produced several nameless IR remotes for products such as the Macintosh TV, TV tuner expansion boards, and the PowerCD drive.
  

    [1]
   



    [2]
   



    [3]
   




  The original Apple Remote was designed with six buttons and made of white plastic. Its shape and layout resembled the first-generation
  
   iPod Shuffle
  
  . A circular Play/Pause/Select button sat in the center of a larger four-button circle of (clockwise): Volume Up, Next/Fast-forward, Volume Down and Previous/Rewind. A separate Menu button was positioned below. The price was set at US$29.00.
  

    [4]
   


  In October 2009, the remote was redesigned as a thinner and longer aluminum version. The new remote was released along with the 27 inch aluminum
  
   iMacs
  
  and
  
   multi-touch
  

   Magic Mouse
  
  . The Play/Pause button was moved out of the center of the directional buttons and put beside the Menu button (under the directional buttons). The symbols for the Volume Up/Down and Next/Fast-forward buttons were replaced with small dots, to make it clear that the buttons were also used to move up, down, left, and right within menus. All of the buttons became black and embossed within aluminum. Along with the new design, the price was dropped to US$19.99. The newer design also underwent a slight revision with the navigation ring. In a small percentage of older remotes, this ring was flush with the curvature of the remote's aluminum body. The more-common revision is bulged slightly; presumably so users can find the ring more easily by touch.
 
  Replacement of the
  
   CR2032 battery
  
  in the original remote is done with a small pointed object such as a
  
   paper clip
  
  at the bottom right edge of the device, where the battery slides out on a tray. The newer version has the battery located behind a compartment in the middle of the device which is accessed by turning a coin in the compartment door's indent.
  

    [5]
   


  The Apple Remote's original function was to enable navigation in
  
   Front Row
  
  , which allows users to browse and play music, view videos (
  
   DVDs
  
  and downloaded files) and browse photos. Although Front Row was removed from
  
   OS X 10.7
  
  and later, some Apple software still works with the remote. It can still be used to control presentations in
  
   Apple Keynote
  
  (on both Intel Macs &
  
   PowerPC
  
  Macs), picture slide shows in
  
   iPhoto
  
  and
  
   Aperture
  
  , DVD films via
  
   DVD Player
  
  , and to play video and audio in
  
   iTunes
  
  and
  
   QuickTime
  
  . Other software that is still compatible includes
  
   Elgato
  
  's EyeTV 3.5, and
  
   VLC media player
  
  . The remote can also be used to run presentations in
  
   Microsoft PowerPoint
  
  2008 or in
  
   OpenOffice.org Impress
  
  .
 
  Other functions controlled by the remote can include putting a device into
  
   sleep mode
  
  , selecting a partition to boot from on startup, and ejecting optical disks.
  

    [6]
   

  A device can be configured to respond only to a particular remote.
  

    [7]
   


  An
  
   iPod
  
  placed in a
  
   dock
  
  featuring an IR sensor can be used with the remote for music and media control.
  

    [8]
   

  The remote's menu functionality does not work on the iPod. The Apple Remote can also be used to control the
  
   iPod Hi-Fi
  
  or third party devices tailored to it.
  

    [9]
   


  Starting with
  
   Boot Camp
  
  1.2, the remote has had some functionality when a user is running
  
   Windows
  
  . If
  
   iTunes
  
  is installed on the Windows partition, pressing the Menu button on the remote will load the program. The remote's media controls also support
  
   Windows Media Player
  
  , as well as system volume control.
  

    [10]
   

  Other third party programs may also utilize the remote's capabilities; media applications such a
  
   foobar2000
  
  and
  
   Media Player Classic
  
  allow users to control their functions via the remote. Applications must be in focus for the remote to control them. Boot Camp 5, the latest version of the software, also includes drivers for the remote control.
  

    [11]
   


  Apple offers a free '
  
   Remote
  
  ' app for
  
   iOS
  
  devices (available in the
  
   iTunes
  

   App Store
  
  ) which allows for wireless control of iTunes on Mac/
  
   Windows
  
  computers or the Apple TV.
 
  The
  
   Siri Remote
  
  was launched with the 4th Generation Apple TV in 2015. It uses both
  
   IR
  
  and
  
   Bluetooth
  
  to communicate with the Apple TV. The remote bares a glass trackpad, dual microphones, 4 buttons for Menu, Home,
  
   Siri
  
  and Play/Pause, also a volume rocker.
  

    [12]
   

  Additionally it has an
  
   accelerometer
  
  (
  
   IMU
  
  ) and a gyroscope
  

    [13]
   

  which allows the remote to be used as a gaming controller for
  
   tvOS
  
  apps and games. The remote (unlike previous generations) uses a built-in rechargeable
  
   Lithium Polymer Battery
  
  that is charged through the
  
   lightning port
  
  at the bottom of the remote.
  

    [14]
   

  The Siri Remote is known as the Apple TV Remote in places that don't support Siri.
  

    [15]
   


  Earlier models of the iMac (Polycarbonate iMac) featured a magnetic rest for the remote,
  

    [17]
   

  which was later removed.
 
  Using the Apple Remote with new MacBook Airs, Retina MacBooks or old Macs without a built-in IR Receiver requires a USB-based infrared receiver and additional software from a third party.
 
  The SmartGUS USB receiver, allows to give back IR functionalities to iMac, MacBook and also Mac Pro. With it, all supported applications (iTunes, Keynote, PowerPoint, OpenOffice Impress, QuickTime Player, iPhoto, VLC...) can use Apple Remote, without any third-party software. Very useful if you still want to perform your slides presentation using this very ergonomic device.
 
  Using Remote Buddy (from IOSPIRIT GmbH) or mira (from Twisted Melon), it is possible to connect an external USB receiver such as the
  
   Windows Media Center
  
  Edition eHome receiver, and use the Apple Remote on these machines with full support for sleep, pairing, low battery detection and controlling a variety of Apple and third party software. In addition, Remote Buddy is able to emulate events of an Apple Remote on these systems, enabling users to use software written for the Apple Remote in exactly the same way as with Macs that have a built-in infrared receiver.
 
  Because many electrical appliances use infrared remote (IR) controls, concurrent use of the Apple Remote with other IR remotes may scramble communications and generate interference, preventing stable use. Remotes should be used individually to circumvent the problem.
  

    [18]
   


  The Apple Remote uses an
  
   NEC IR protocol
  

   [1]
  
  which consists of a differential
  
   PPM
  
  encoding on a 1:3
  
   duty cycle
  
  38
  
   kHz
  
  950
  
   nm
  

   infrared
  
  carrier. There are 32 bits of encoded data between the
  
   AGC
  
  leader and the stop bit:
  

    [19]
   


  While the Apple Remote uses the NEC IR protocol for the timing, the 32-bit data package is in a different format. It consists of two 16 bit LSB words.
 
  This is the internal page table (command page 0x00):
 
  This is the command page table (command page 0x0e):
 