

  This is a
  
   list of
   
    macOS
   
   components
  
  , features that are included in the current Mac operating system.
 


  Automator is an application developed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  for
  
   macOS
  
  that implements point-and-click (or
  
   drag and drop
  
  ) creation of
  
   workflows
  
  for automating repetitive tasks into
  
   batches
  
  for quicker alteration, thus saving time and effort over human intervention to manually change each file separately. Automator enables the repetition of tasks across a wide variety of programs, including
  
   Finder
  
  ,
  
   Safari
  
  ,
  
   Calendar
  
  ,
  
   Contacts
  
  and others. It can also work with third-party applications such as
  
   Microsoft Office
  
  ,
  
   Adobe Photoshop
  
  or
  
   Pixelmator
  
  . The icon features a robot holding a pipe, a reference to
  
   pipelines
  
  , a
  
   computer science
  
  term for connected data workflows. Automator was first released with
  
   Mac OS X Tiger
  
  (10.4).
 
  Automator provides a
  
   graphical user interface
  
  for automating tasks without knowledge of programming or scripting languages. Tasks can be recorded as they are performed by the user or can be selected from a list. The output of the previous action can become the input to the next action.
 
  Automator comes with a library of Actions (file renaming, finding linked images, creating a new mail message, etc.) that act as individual steps in a Workflow document. A Workflow document is used to carry out repetitive tasks. Workflows can be saved and reused.
  
   Unix
  
  command line scripts and AppleScripts can also be invoked as Actions. The actions are linked together in a Workflow. The Workflow can be saved as an application, Workflow file or a
  
   contextual menu
  
  item. Options can be set when the Workflow is created or when the Workflow is run. A workflow file created in Automator is saved in /Users/{User Name}/Library/Services.
 
  Calculator is a basic
  
   calculator
  

   application
  
  made by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  and bundled with
  
   macOS
  
  . It has three modes: basic, scientific, and programmer. Basic includes a number pad, buttons for adding, subtracting, multiplying, and dividing, as well as memory keys. Scientific mode supports exponents and trigonometric functions, and programmer mode gives the user access to more options related to
  
   computer programming
  
  .
 
  The Calculator program has a long history going back to the very beginning of the Macintosh platform, where a simple four-function calculator program was a standard
  
   desk accessory
  
  from the earliest system versions. Though no
  
   higher math
  
  capability was included, third-party developers provided upgrades, and Apple released the
  
   Graphing Calculator
  
  application with the first
  
   PowerPC
  
  release (7.1.2) of the Mac OS, and it was a standard component through Mac OS 9. Apple currently ships a different application called
  
   Grapher
  
  .
 
  Calculator has
  
   Reverse Polish notation
  
  support, and can also speak the buttons pressed and result returned.
 
  The Calculator appeared first as a
  
   desk accessory
  
  in
  
   first version
  
  of
  
   Macintosh System
  
  for the 1984
  
   Macintosh 128k
  
  . Its original incarnation was developed by
  
   Chris Espinosa
  
  and its appearance was designed, in part, by
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  when Espinosa, flustered by Jobs's dissatisfaction with all of his prototype designs, conceived an application called
  
   The Steve Jobs Roll Your Own Calculator Construction Set
  
  that allowed Jobs to tailor the look of the calculator to his liking. Its design was maintained with the same basic math operations until
  
   the final release of classic Mac OS
  
  in 2002.
  

    [1]
   


  A
  
   Dashboard
  
  Calculator widget is included in all versions of macOS from
  
   Mac OS X Tiger
  
  onwards. It only has the basic mode of its desktop counterpart. Since the release of
  
   OS X Yosemite
  
  , there is also a simple calculator widget available in the notifications area.
  

    [2]
   


  Since the release of
  
   Mac OS X Leopard
  
  , simple arithmetic functions can be calculated from
  
   Spotlight feature
  
  .
  

    [3]
   

  They include the standard addition, subtraction, division, multiplication, exponentiation and the use of the
  
   percent sign
  
  to denote
  
   percentage
  
  .
 
  Apple Chess is a
  
   3D
  

   chess game
  
  for
  
   macOS
  
  , developed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  It supports
  
   chess variants
  
  such as
  
   crazyhouse
  
  and
  
   suicide chess
  
  . It originates in
  
   OpenStep
  
  and
  
   Mac OS X 10.2
  
  and is based on
  
   open source software
  
  . Apple redistributes the source code under its own Apple Sample Code License.
  

    [4]
   



    [5]
   


  Contacts, called Address Book before
  
   OS X Mountain Lion
  
  , is a computerized
  
   address book
  
  included with
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  's
  
   macOS
  
  . It includes various synchronizing capabilities and integrates with other macOS applications and features.
 
  Address Book has two viewing modes: View Card and Column and View Card Only. The user can switch between modes with a control in the upper-left portion of the window under the close box.
 
  In releases prior to Lion, in View Card and Column, the Address Book window is divided into three panes. The first pane has the title Group. This pane lists All, Directories, and each user-made group. Users can add new groups by pulling the File menu down to New Group, or typing Command-Shift-N.
 
  When selecting All or a user-made group, the second column has the title Name. It lists the names of the people with cards in that group, or all the names if the selected group is All, in alphabetical order by first or last name, depending on user preference.
 
  The third pane has the card corresponding to the selected name. The card can include information, some of which the user can classify into customizable categories like Home and Work. Many of the fields can have duplicate entries, for example, if the person the card describes has several email addresses. The user can edit the fields by pressing the edit button below the bottom-left of the third pane. Address Book can search LDAP (network) directories. Users customize these in the LDAP tab of the preferences. Users search these by selecting Directories in the first pane, selecting a directory or All in the second pane, and typing their search in the search box above the top-left of the third pane. Results appear in the third pane.
 
  The computer must be connected to a
  
   local area network
  
  on which the directories reside. If the location has changed or the network connection has been lost, Address Book can’t look up contacts in directories on the network. If the computer is set up to access directory services on one's local area network, Address Book automatically searches the directory services for addresses.
 
  One can also set up Address Book to search Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) servers for addresses. LDAP is an Internet protocol used for looking up contact information on servers.
 
  Information from network directories appears only when one is searching. To search a network directory, select Directories in the Group column and a directory in the Directory column, and then type text in the search field. To add someone from the network directory to one's personal address book, drag the card from the directory to All in the Group column.
 
  For instructions about setting up one's computer to access directory services on one's local area network, open Directory Utility and choose Help > Directory Utility Help.
 
  Dictionary is an application that includes an in-built dictionary and thesaurus.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  Photo Booth is an application where the user can take pictures of themselves.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  QuickTime Player is an application that can play video and sound files.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  Safari is a web browser.
 
  Time Machine is an application where the user can back up their files.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  Activity Monitor is a
  
   system monitor
  
  for the
  
   macOS
  

   operating system
  
  , which also incorporates
  
   task manager
  
  functionality.
  

    [6]
   



    [7]
   

  Activity Monitor appeared in
  
   Mac OS X v10.3
  
  , when it subsumed the functionality of the programs Process Viewer (a task manager) and CPU Monitor found in the previous version of OS X.
  

    [8]
   



    [9]
   

  In
  
   OS X 10.9
  
  , Activity Monitor was significantly revamped and gained a 5th tab for "energy" (in addition to CPU, memory, disk, and network).
  

    [10]
   


  AirPort Utility is a program that allows users to configure an
  
   AirPort
  

   wireless network
  
  and manage services associated with and devices connected to
  
   AirPort Routers
  
  . It comes pre-installed on
  
   macOS
  
  , and is available to download for
  
   Microsoft Windows
  
  and
  
   iOS
  
  . AirPort Utility is unique in that it offers network configuration in a native application as opposed to a web application. It provides a graphical overview of AirPort devices attached to a network, and provides tools to manage each one individually. It allows users to configure their network preferences, assign
  
   Back to My Mac
  
  accounts to the network, and configure USB attached Printers and hard drives.
  

    [11]
   

  The current versions are 6.3.6 for recent versions of
  
   macOS
  
  , 5.6.1 for
  
   Microsoft Windows
  
  and older versions
  

    [12]
   

  of Mac OS X,
  

    [13]
   

  and 1.3.4 for
  
   iOS
  
  .
  

    [14]
   


  On January 30, 2013, Apple released AirPort Utility 6.0 for macOS featuring a redesign of the user interface focused on increasing usability for novice users.
  

    [15]
   

  Reception was mixed with some media outlets reporting IT professionals and network administrators being frustrated over some removed features.
  

    [15]
   

  It was reported that most end users, however, wouldn’t notice the feature omissions.
  

    [16]
   

  Users requiring the removed features can still access the previous version of AirPort Utility using a workaround.
  

    [17]
   


  The Audio MIDI Setup utility is a program that comes with the
  
   macOS
  
  operating system for adjusting the computer's
  
   audio
  
  input and output configuration settings and managing
  
   MIDI
  
  devices.
 
  It was first introduced in
  
   Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard
  
  as a simplified way to configure MIDI Devices. Users need to be aware that prior to this release, MIDI devices did not require this step, and it mention of it might be omitted from MIDI devices from third-party manufactures.
 
  Bluetooth File Exchange is a utility that comes with the
  
   macOS
  

   operating system
  
  , used to exchange files to or from a
  
   Bluetooth
  
  -enabled device. For example, it could be used to send an image to a
  
   cellphone
  
  , or to receive an image or other documents from a
  
   PDA
  
  .
 
  ColorSync Utility is software that ships with
  
   macOS
  
  . It is used for management of color profiles and filters used in Apple's
  
   PDF
  

   workflow
  
  , or applying filters to PDF documents.
 
  The interface is composed of two parts: the document browser and the utility window. The document browser lets you zoom in and out of an image or apply a Filter to it. The utility window has several options: Profile First Aid, Profiles, Devices, Filters and Calculator.
 

   Profile First Aid
  
  allows you to repair ColorSync color profiles so they conform to the
  
   International Color Consortium
  
  specification.
 

   Profiles
  
  allows you to browse the profiles installed on your system, grouped by location, class or space, and graphically compare any two profiles.
 
  The profile map is displayed as a rotatable, scalable 3D object and can be plotted in
  
   CIELAB
  
  ,
  
   CIELUV
  
  ,
  
   Yxy
  
  ,
  
   Yuv
  
  and
  
   CIEXYZ
  
  .
 
  The
  
   Devices
  
  section allows you to see a list of all registered ColorSync devices such as your displays and printers, and see what ColorSync profile is applied to each one. You can also override the default setting.
 
  The
  
   Filters
  
  section allows you to build and modify PDF filters that are available to the rest of the operating system. Each filter can be set to appear in one of three domains: Application, PDF Workflows, and Printing.
 
  Filters set to Printing will appear in the drop-down menu under the "Save as PDF..." button in the standard Mac OS X print dialog box. Filters set to PDF Workflow will appear in the
  
   Quartz
  
  Filters drop-down menu in the ColorSync section of a print dialog box. The default filters that ship with Mac OS X are:
 
  User-created filters can have color management, image effects, PDF retouch, domain selection and comments.
 
  The
  
   Color Management
  
  section allows assigning a profile, choosing a default profile,
  
   rendering intent
  
  , converting to a profile or intermediate transform.
 
  The
  
   Intermediate Transform
  
  section allows adjustment of brightness, tint, hue, saturation, bilevel (high pass filter) or profile assignment, to either
  
   grayscale
  
  ,
  
   RGB
  
  or
  
   CMYK
  
  , or all data in the file. This can be applied to either text, graphics, images or shading.
 
  Complex filters can be created by stacking multiple effects. Any changes made to the PDF file can then be saved as a new PDF file.
 

   Calculator
  
  can convert between
  
   RGB
  
  ,
  
   CMYK
  
  and other color value schemes, and features an interactive color-picker for identifying a color on the screen, duplicating a feature of another bundled utility,
  

    DigitalColor Meter
   

  .
 
  ColorSync is
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  's
  
   color management
  

   API
  
  for the
  
   Classic Mac OS
  
  and
  
   macOS
  
  . Apple developed the original 1.0 version of ColorSync as a Mac-only architecture, which made it into an operating system release in 1993. In the same year, Apple co-founded the
  
   International Color Consortium
  
  (ICC) to develop a
  
   cross-platform
  
  profile format which became part of ColorSync 2.0. The system
  
   Color Management Module
  
  (CMM) was "LinoColorCMM", which was developed by Linotype-Hell AG (now part of
  
   Heidelberger Druckmaschinen
  
  AG). The same CMM was used in Microsoft Windows 2000 and XP under the rubric of "Image Color Management" (ICM)
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  . Apple, with the help of
  
   Adobe
  
  had ported ColorSync 2.0 and its
  
   SDK
  
  to
  
   Microsoft Windows
  
  . With ColorSync 3.0, the Windows version which was initially planned was discontinued. ColorSync 4.0 is the latest version, introduced in
  
   Mac OS X 10.1
  
  .
 
  Human
  
   color perception
  
  is a very complex and subtle process, and different devices have widely different color
  
   gamuts
  
  or ranges of color they can display. To deal with these issues, ColorSync provides several different methods of doing color matching. For instance,
  
   perceptual
  
  matching tries to preserve as closely as possible the relative relationships between colors, even if all the colors must be systematically distorted in order to get them to fit within the gamut of the destination device. Because the human eye is more sensitive to
  
   color differences
  
  rather than
  
   absolute colors
  
  , this method tends to produce the best-looking results, subjectively speaking, for many common uses, but there are other methods that work better in some cases.
 
  As dictated by the ICC system, the
  
   profile connection space
  
  in ColorSync is the
  
   CIE XYZ color space
  
  . All image input and output devices (scanners, printers, displays) have to be characterized by providing an
  
   ICC profile
  
  that defines how their color information is to be interpreted relative to this reference color space. This profile might be provided by the device manufacturer, but for better quality results, it might be generated by performing actual measurements on the device with a
  
   colorimeter
  
  . Thus, when an image is scanned on a scanner, the image file will include a copy of the scanner's profile to characterize the meaning of its color information. Then, before the image is sent to an output device, a
  
   matching
  
  process converts the color information at the time of rendering from the
  
   source profile
  
  (that attached to the image) to the
  
   destination profile
  
  (that attached to the output device) so that the resulting colors print or display as closely as possible to the original image.
 
  Console is a
  
   log
  
  viewer developed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  and included with
  
   macOS
  
  . It allows users to search through all of the system's logged messages, and can alert the user when certain types of messages are logged.
  

    [18]
   

  The
  
   Console
  
  is generally used for troubleshooting when there is a problem with the computer.
  

    [19]
   

  macOS itself, as well as any applications that are used, send a constant stream of messages to the system in the form of log files. The console allows you to read the system logs, help find certain ones, monitor them, and filter their contents.
  

    [20]
   


  Clicking on "Show Log List" in the toolbar will bring up the Log List. The Log List opens a sidebar which shows all of the different logs that the system maintains. This list helps in viewing the many different logs maintained in various parts of the system by bringing them all together to one place. By clicking on a particular log category, all of the logs will be shown.
  

    [21]
   


  The System Log Queries contains all of the logs that have to do with the entire system. This includes
  
   system
  
  logs as well as individual
  
   application
  
  logs.
  

    [21]
   


  Selecting All Messages gives a live look at your computer's activities, updated live. This includes all activities from both the system as well as any applications running. Logs in this section of the Console are all formatted uniformly. They all include a
  
   timestamp
  
  , the name of the
  
   process
  
  or
  
   application
  
  , and the actual message of the
  
   log
  
  . When the message displayed includes a paperclip icon next to it, it means that it is a shortened version of a longer report, and clicking the icon will show the complete report.
  

    [22]
   


  In addition to viewing all messages, users can also create custom queries with any criteria that they like. These custom queries will filter the messages and will also be shown in the All Messages section. In order to make a new query, choose "New System Log Query" from the File menu.
  

    [23]
   


  Migration Assistant is an application for migrating information from another computer to the computer in use. It may be from a Windows computer or a Mac.
 
  System Information is an application that shows the system information about a Macintosh product.
 
  VoiceOver is an application where the user can listen to spoken descriptions on the computer.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  Finder is the default
  
   file manager
  
  and
  
   graphical interface
  

   shell
  
  of
  
   macOS
  
  . It can store many windows.
 
  Archive Utility (BOMArchiveHelper until
  
   Mac OS X 10.5
  
  ) is the default
  
   archive file
  
  handler in
  
   macOS
  
  . It is usually invoked automatically when opening a file in one of its supported formats.
  

    [24]
   

  It can be used to create compressed
  
   ZIP archives
  
  by choosing "Create archive of 'file'" (Leopard: "Compress") in the
  
   Finder
  
  's
  
   File
  
  or
  
   contextual menu
  
  . It is located at
  
   /System/Library/CoreServices/Applications/Archive Utility.app
  
  in Mac OS X 10.10,
  
   /System/Library/CoreServices/Archive Utility.app
  
  in 10.5 and later, and
  
   /System/Library/CoreServices/BOMArchiveHelper.app
  
  in
  
   10.4
  


    [25]
   

  Prior to Archive Utility's inclusion in
  
   Mac OS X v10.3
  
  , beginning with
  
   Mac OS 7.6
  
  , Apple bundled the freeware
  
   StuffIt Expander
  
  with the operating system.
 
  Invoking Archive Utility manually shows a minimal
  
   GUI
  
  letting the user change Archive Utility preferences or choose files to compress or uncompress. BOMArchiveHelper 10.4.11 cannot be manually invoked. It may be inferred that prior to 10.5, BOMArchiveHelper could not be manually invoked.
 
  BOM is an abbreviation of Bill of Materials.
  
   Bill of Materials
  
  files or .bom files are used by the macOS
  
   Installer
  
  program to document where files in an installer bundle are installed, what their file permissions should be, and other file metadata. Thus, a Bill of Materials is read by the Installer, and Archive Utility
  
   helps
  
  it by extracting the files specified in the BOM.
 
  Crash Reporter is the standard
  
   crash reporter
  
  in
  
   macOS
  
  .
  

    [26]
   

  Crash Reporter can send the crash logs to
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  for their
  
   engineers
  
  to review.
 
  Crash Reporter has three modes of operations:
 
  The developer tool
  
   CrashReporterPrefs
  
  can be used to change modes, as can using the terminal command
  

    defaults
   
   write com.apple.CrashReporter DialogType [basic|developer|server]
  
  .
 
  In basic mode, if Crash Reporter notices an application has crashed twice in succession, it will offer to rename the application's preference file and try again (corrupted preference files being a common cause of crashes).
 
  When reporting a crash, the top text field of the window has the crash log, while the bottom field is for user comments. Users may also
  
   copy and paste
  
  the log into their e-mail client to send to a third-party application developer for the developer to use.
 
  The Classic Environment, usually referred to as Classic, is a
  
   hardware
  
  and
  
   software
  

   abstraction layer
  
  in
  
   PowerPC
  
  versions of
  
   Mac OS X
  
  that allows most
  
   legacy
  

   applications
  
  compatible with
  
   Mac OS 9
  
  to run on macOS. The name "Classic" is also sometimes used by software vendors to refer to the
  
   application programming interface
  
  available to "classic" applications, to differentiate between programming for Mac OS X and the classic version of the Mac OS.
 
  The Classic Environment is supported on PowerPC-based
  
   Macintosh
  
  computers running versions of Mac OS X up to
  
   10.4
  
  "Tiger", but is not supported with
  
   10.5
  
  "Leopard", nor on
  
   Intel
  
  -based Macintosh computers running any version of macOS.
 
  The Classic Environment is a descendant of
  
   Rhapsody
  
  's
  
   "Blue Box"
  
  emulation layer, which served as a
  
   proof of concept
  
  . (Previously, Apple
  
   A/UX
  
  also offered a virtualized Mac OS environment on top of a
  
   UNIX
  
  operating system.) It uses a Mac OS 9
  
   System Folder
  
  , and a
  
   New World ROM
  
  file to bridge the differences between the older PowerPC Macintosh
  
   platforms
  
  and the
  
   XNU
  

   kernel
  
  environment. The Classic Environment was created as a key element of Apple's strategy to replace the
  
   classic Mac OS
  
  (versions 9 and below) with Mac OS X as the standard operating system (OS) used by
  
   Macintosh
  
  computers by eliminating the need to use the older OS directly.
 
  The Classic Environment can be loaded at
  
   login
  
  (for faster activation when needed later), on command, or whenever a Mac OS application that requires it is launched (to reduce the use of system resources when not needed). It requires a full version of Mac OS 9 to be installed on the system, and loads an instance of that OS in a
  
   sandbox
  
  environment, replacing some low-level
  
   system calls
  
  with equivalent calls to macOS via updated system files and the Classic Support system enabler. This sandbox is used to launch all "classic" Mac OS applications—there is only one instance of the Classic
  
   process
  
  running for a given user, and only one user per machine may be running Classic at a time.
 
  If the user chooses to launch the Classic Environment only when needed, launching a "classic" application first launches the Classic Environment, which can be configured to appear in a
  
   window
  
  resembling the display of a computer booting into Mac OS 9. When the Classic Environment has finished loading, the application launches. When a "classic" application is in the foreground, the
  
   menu bar
  
  at the top of the screen changes to look like the older Mac OS system menu.
  
   Dialog boxes
  
  and other user-interface elements retain their traditional appearance.
 
  The Classic Environment provides a way to run "Classic" applications on Apple's
  
   G5
  
  systems as well as on most G4 based computers sold after January 2003. These machines cannot boot Mac OS 9 or earlier without the bridging capabilities of the Classic Environment or other software (see
  
   SheepShaver
  
  ). Classic is not supported on versions of Mac OS X that run on Apple systems incorporating
  
   Intel microprocessors
  
  , which includes all new shipping Apple computers, as of September 2006.
  

    [27]
   

  The last version of Mac OS X to support the Classic Environment on PowerPCs was
  
   Mac OS X v10.4
  
  "Tiger".
 
  The Classic Environment's compatibility is usually very good, provided the application using it does not require direct access to hardware or engage in full-screen drawing. However, it is not a complete clone of Mac OS 9. The Finder included with
  
   Mac OS X v10.2
  
  and later does not support the "Reveal Object"
  
   Apple events
  
  used by some Mac OS 9 applications, causing the "Reveal In Finder" functionality for those applications to be lost. Early releases of Mac OS X would often fail to draw window frames of Classic applications correctly, and after the Classic Environment's windowing was made
  
   double buffered
  
  in
  
   Mac OS X Panther
  
  , some older applications and games sometimes failed to update the screen properly, such as the original Macintosh port of
  

    Doom
   

  . However, the Classic Environment "resurrected" some older applications that had previously been unusable on the
  
   Macintosh Quadra
  
  and
  
   Power Macintosh
  
  series; this is because Mac OS X replaced Mac OS 9's
  
   virtual memory
  
  system with a more standard and less fragile implementation.
 
  The Classic Environment's
  
   performance
  
  is also generally acceptable, with a few exceptions. Most of an application is run directly as PowerPC
  
   code
  
  (which would not be possible on Intel-based Macs).
  
   Motorola
  

   68k
  
  code is handled by the same
  
   Motorola 68LC040 emulator
  
  that Mac OS 9 uses. Some application functions are actually faster in the Classic Environment than under Mac OS 9 on equivalent hardware, due to performance improvements in the newer operating system's
  
   device drivers
  
  . These applications are largely those that use heavy disk processing, and were often quickly
  
   ported
  
  to Mac OS X by their developers. On the other hand, applications that rely on heavy processing and which did not share resources under Mac OS 9's
  
   co-operative multitasking
  
  model will be interrupted by other (non-Classic) processes under macOS's
  
   preemptive multitasking
  
  . The greater processing power of most systems that run Mac OS X (compared to systems intended to run
  
   Mac OS 8
  
  or 9) helps to mitigate the performance degradation of the Classic Environment's emulation.
 
  Software Update is a
  
   tool
  
  that installs the latest version of Apple software on computers running macOS. It was originally introduced to Mac users in
  
   Mac OS 9
  
  . A Windows version has been available since the introduction of
  
   iTunes 7
  
  , under the name Apple Software Update. Software Update automatically informs users of new updates.
 
  The program is part of the
  
   CoreServices
  
  in macOS. Software Update can be set to check for updates daily, weekly, monthly, or not at all; in addition, it can download and store the associated
  
   .pkg
  
  file (the same type used by
  
   Installer
  
  ) to be installed at a later date and maintains a history of installed updates.
 
  Software Updates consist of incremental updates of macOS and its applications, Security Updates,
  
   device drivers
  
  and
  
   firmware
  
  updates. All software updates require the user to enter their administrative password, as with all consequential system changes. Some updates require a system restart. Starting with
  
   Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard
  
  , updates that require a reboot log out the user prior to installation and automatically restart the computer when complete. In earlier versions of macOS, the updates are installed, but critical files are not replaced until the next system startup.
 