

  The
  
   Genius Bar
  
  is a
  
   tech support
  
  station located inside all but one of
  
   Apple's retail stores
  
  , the purpose of which is to offer help and support for
  
   Apple
  
  products.
  
   Ron Johnson
  
  , the former Senior Vice President for Retail, has often referred to the Genius Bar as the "heart and soul of our stores".
  

    [1]
   

  Employees are specially trained and certified at the Genius Bar.
  

    [2]
   

  Their role is to help customers with Apple hardware and software. All in-store repairs of Apple products are carried out by "Geniuses", formerly known as Mac Geniuses. In September 2009, the Family Room Specialists were folded into the mix to handle
  
   iPod
  
  and
  
   iPhone
  
  troubleshooting. After its release in 2010,
  
   iPad
  
  appointments also fell under the Family Room Specialists. Apple now maintains two Genius Bar queues: Mac and Mobile Device.
  

    [3]
   


  The Genius Bar was referenced in a short-lived 2012 television advertising campaign with an actor portraying a Genius Bar employee who helped Apple customers in everyday situations. When launched in Australia the Service was met with hope however due to delays the original inception date of November 17th 2006 did not flourish.
  

    [4]
   



    [5]
   




  The layout of a Genius Bar previously consisted of at least two 15" MacBook Pro computers, often mounted on "floating" stands. Employees now use iPads with similar software to check in machines for repairs. There may be other "floating" notebooks for iPod/iPhone troubleshooting, often referred to as "floaters". LCD screens behind the Bar play looped videos which offer tips to customers waiting for help. Stools can be found in front of the Bar for people to sit and chat with each other or with employees.
 
  The "Red Telephone" sometimes seen behind the Genius Bar was a direct line to Apple product specialists, allowing for problems and questions too complicated for the in-store employees to answer.
  

    [6]
   

  As of August 2009, this phone is no longer installed in newer Apple Retail Stores and removed in others.
  

    [7]
   


  The employees can also be viewed as the local representatives of
  
   AppleCare
  
  . They offer personal support when customers have problems or questions relating to their Apple products. Most services carried out at the Genius Bar are free. Non-warranty service (which is paid for by the customer when repairs are complete) is also routinely performed. In some countries, Apple has service depots where portable repairs (for issues such as accidental damage) can be completed for a flat rate. Most portable computer repairs and all desktop repairs are performed in-store and completed overnight or within a few days.
 
  Larger support teams are headed up by the "Lead Genius", who schedules workers, and handles customer service issues at the Genius Bar. The Lead Genius is assisted by the "Genius Admin", who is in charge of managing the administrative paperwork, organizing the Geniuses' work and liaising with customers about their repairs.
 
  Trainees (referred to as "GYO", or Grow-Your-Own Geniuses) are not certified, but trained for iPod and iPhone issues, and help out where needed before going to formal training and certification at one of several training locations worldwide, including
  
   Cupertino, California
  
  ;
  
   Atlanta, Georgia
  
  ;
  
   Austin, Texas
  
  ;
  
   Sydney, Australia
  
  ;
  
   London, England
  
  and
  
   Ireland
  
  .
 
  The
  
   Genius Training Student Workbook
  
  is
  
   Apple
  
  's
  
   employee training manual
  
  for
  
   Apple Store
  
  tech-support employees, called Geniuses.
  

    [8]
   

  The manual features various marketing techniques revolving around the end goal of selling merchandise. One of the basic tenets taught to the employees in training is that “Everyone in the Apple Store is in the business of selling”.
  

    [9]
   


  The basic selling strategy is summed up with a
  
   mnemonic device
  
  :
  
   A
  
  pproach,
  
   P
  
  robe,
  
   P
  
  resent,
  
   L
  
  isten,
  
   E
  
  nd. When customers have concerns, the prescribed response in the manual is the "Three Fs:" Feel, Felt, and Found technique.
  

    [10]
   

  Although employees who are not in the Genius role don't receive this manual or go through this training, every Genius must attend a two-week recruit training that mandates programs as diverse as “Using Diagnostic Services” and “The Power of Empathy.”
  

    [9]
   

  Geniuses also have a list of words that the manual clearly stipulates as banned; words such as "bomb", "crash" and "hang" must be substituted by "does not respond" or "unexpectedly quits".
  

    [11]
   

  The manual also teaches employees to read
  
   emotional cues
  
  such as drumming on a table or placing a palm on the back of the neck that might mean a customer is bored or frustrated, respectively.
  

    [12]
   


  The manual was a well-kept secret, until a copy leaked in August 2012 and ended in the hands of
  
   Gizmodo
  
  's senior staff writer Sam Biddle, who commented: "It’s a penetrating look inside Apple: psychological mastery, banned words, roleplaying—you’ve never seen anything like it."
  

    [13]
   

  A
  

    Christian Science Monitor
   

  article connected the manual's contents to the idea of the "
  
   reality distortion field
  
  ", a term for Apple's effectiveness at charming customers.
  

    [14]
   


  Currently, Apple offers the Genius Bar for technical support, and has Creatives — software trainers — available at all times to answer less technical questions.
 
  Over the years, Apple has experimented with ways of offering service and support to complement the Genius Bar. Some examples, all now defunct, include:
 
  Pro Labs and Open Lab were introduced with the opening of the Apple Store on
  
   West 14th Street
  
  in
  
   New York City
  
  ,
  
   New York
  
  while Pro Labs is also offered at the Sydney, Australia Apple Store and the
  
   Pudong
  
  ,
  
   China
  
  Apple Store. Open Lab to date is only offered at the West 14th Street location.
  

    [17]
   



    [18]
   


  Apple has also branded features in their
  
   iTunes
  
  application "Genius" that make musical suggestions based on the user's observed taste.
 