

  A
  
   dock connector
  
  is a connector used to attach a mobile electronic device simultaneously to multiple external resources. The dock connector will typically carry a variety of signals and power, through a single connector, to simplify the process of
  
   docking
  
  the
  
   mobile device
  
  . A dock connector may be embedded in a mechanical fixture used to support or align the mobile device or may be at the end of a cable.
 
  The dock connector was originally associated with laptops, but other mobile devices use the concept.
 


  Docking connectors for
  
   laptop computers
  
  are usually embedded into a mechanical device that supports and aligns the laptop and sports various single function ports and a power source that are aggregated into the docking connector. Docking connectors would carry interfaces such as
  
   keyboard
  
  ,
  
   serial
  
  ,
  
   parallel
  
  , and
  
   video
  
  ports from the laptop and supply power to it.
 
  Many mobile devices feature a dock connector.
 
  Dock connector can be used to interface with accessories such as external speakers, including stereo systems and
  
   clock radios
  
  . Automotive accessories for the mobile devices include charging cradles, FM transmitters for playing audio through the car's speakers and a
  
   GPS receiver
  
  . There are dock connector cables that offer additional capability such as direct integration with the car's audio system and controls.
 
  Apple's proprietary 30-pin connector was common to most Apple mobile devices (
  
   iPhone (1st generation)
  
  ,
  
   iPhone 3G
  
  ,
  
   iPhone 3GS
  
  ,
  
   iPhone 4
  
  ,
  
   iPhone 4S
  
  , 1st through 4th generation
  
   iPod Touch
  
  ,
  
   iPad
  
  ,
  
   iPad 2
  
  , and
  
   iPad 3
  
  ) from its introduction with the 3rd generation
  
   iPod
  
  in 2003 until the
  
   Lightning connector
  
  was released in late 2012. Originally, the Apple dock connector carried
  
   USB
  
  ,
  
   FireWire
  
  , some controls and line-level audio outputs.
  

    [2]
   



    [3]
   

  As the iPod changed, so did the signals in the dock connector. Video was added to the connector. FireWire was phased out of the iPods, which led to a discontinuity in usage of the dock connector. As a result of the popularity of Apple's iPod and iPhone devices using the connector, a
  
   cottage industry
  
  was created of third-party devices that could connect to the interface.
  

    [4]
   

  With the discontinuation of the sixth-generation 160 GB iPod Classic and the
  
   iPhone 4S
  
  , the last Apple products to feature the original 30-pin connector, the connector was also discontinued in September 2014.
  

    [1]
   



    [5]
   


  Apple introduced a 8-pin dock connector, named
  
   Lightning
  
  , on September 12, 2012. The
  
   iPhone 5
  
  and later,
  
   iPod touch (5th generation)
  
  and later, seventh generation
  
   iPod nano
  
  , every
  
   iPad mini
  
  ,
  
   iPad (4th generation)
  
  and later, and
  
   iPad Pro
  
  all use the Lightning connector. Apple Lightning connector pins can be accessed from both sides of the connector allowing insertion with either side facing up.
  

    [6]
   

  The Lightning connector replaced the 30-pin dock connector used by previous generations of iPods, iPhones, and iPads.
 
  The
  
   Samsung
  

   Galaxy Tab
  
  and
  
   Galaxy Note
  
  30-pin dock/charging connector is very similar to - although not identical with - the non-proprietary
  
   PDMI connector
  
  . It is unrelated to the Apple 30-pin connector.
  

    [7]
   


  the 2001 Korean Telecommunications Technology Association (TTA) "Standard on I/O Connection Interface of Digital Cellular Phone" defined a 24-pin electromechanical interface specifications for cellular phone charging, wired data communication, analog audio, etc.
  

    [8]
   

  The 2007 updated version has only 20 pins but added composite video output support among other changes.
  

    [9]
   


  The
  
   Portable Digital Media Interface
  
  (PDMI) is a 30-pin interconnection standard for
  
   portable media players
  
  . It was developed by the
  
   Consumer Electronics Association
  
  as ANSI/CEA-2017-A,
  
   Common Interconnection for Portable Media Players
  
  in February 2010. The standard was developed with the input or support of over fifty consumer electronics companies worldwide.
  

    [10]
   

