

  A
  
   mobile phone
  
  is a portable
  
   telephone
  
  that can make and receive
  
   calls
  
  over a
  
   radio frequency
  
  link while the user is moving within a telephone service area. The radio frequency link establishes a connection to the switching systems of a
  
   mobile phone operator
  
  , which provides access to the
  
   public switched telephone network
  
  (PSTN). Most modern mobile telephone services use a
  
   cellular network
  
  architecture, and, therefore, mobile telephones are often also called
  
   cellular telephones
  
  or
  
   cell phones
  
  . In addition to
  
   telephony
  
  , 2000s-era mobile phones support a variety of other
  
   services
  
  , such as
  
   text messaging
  
  ,
  
   MMS
  
  ,
  
   email
  
  ,
  
   Internet access
  
  , short-range wireless communications (
  
   infrared
  
  ,
  
   Bluetooth
  
  ), business applications, gaming, and
  
   digital photography
  
  . Mobile phones which offer these and more general computing capabilities are referred to as
  
   smartphones
  
  .
 
  The first handheld mobile phone was demonstrated by
  
   John F. Mitchell
  


    [1]
   



    [2]
   

  and
  
   Martin Cooper
  
  of
  
   Motorola
  
  in 1973, using a handset weighing c. 4.4 lbs (2 kg).
  

    [3]
   

  In 1983, the
  
   DynaTAC 8000x
  
  was the first commercially available handheld mobile phone. From 1983 to 2014, worldwide mobile phone subscriptions grew to over seven billion, penetrating 100% of the global population and reaching even the
  
   bottom of the economic pyramid
  
  .
  

    [4]
   

  In first quarter of 2016, the top
  
   smartphone
  
  manufacturers were
  
   Samsung
  
  ,
  
   Apple
  
  , and
  
   Huawei
  
  (and "[s]martphone sales represented 78 percent of total mobile phone sales").
  

    [5]
   




  A handheld mobile radio telephone service was envisioned in the early stages of radio engineering. In 1917,
  
   Finnish
  
  inventor
  
   Eric Tigerstedt
  
  filed a patent for a "pocket-size folding telephone with a very thin carbon microphone". Early predecessors of cellular phones included
  
   analog
  
  radio communications from ships and trains. The race to create truly portable telephone devices began after World War II, with developments taking place in many countries. The advances in
  
   mobile telephony
  
  have been traced in successive "generations", starting with the early zeroth-generation (
  
   0G
  
  ) services, such as
  
   Bell System
  
  's
  
   Mobile Telephone Service
  
  and its successor, the
  
   Improved Mobile Telephone Service
  
  . These 0G systems were not
  
   cellular
  
  , supported few simultaneous calls, and were very expensive.
 
  The first handheld mobile phone was demonstrated by
  
   John F. Mitchell
  


    [1]
   



    [2]
   

  and
  
   Martin Cooper
  
  of
  
   Motorola
  
  in 1973, using a handset weighing c. 4.4 lbs (2 kg).
  

    [3]
   

  The first commercial automated cellular network was launched in Japan by
  
   Nippon Telegraph and Telephone
  
  in 1979. This was followed in 1981 by the simultaneous launch of the
  
   Nordic Mobile Telephone
  
  (NMT) system in Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden.
  

    [6]
   

  Several other countries then followed in the early to mid-1980s. These first-generation (
  
   1G
  
  ) systems could support far more simultaneous calls but still used
  
   analog
  
  cellular technology. In 1983, the
  
   DynaTAC 8000x
  
  was the first commercially available handheld mobile phone.
 
  In 1991, the second-generation (
  
   2G
  
  )
  
   digital
  
  cellular technology was launched in Finland by
  
   Radiolinja
  
  on the
  
   GSM
  
  standard. This sparked competition in the sector as the new operators challenged the incumbent 1G network operators.
 
  Ten years later, in 2001, the third generation (
  
   3G
  
  ) was launched in Japan by
  
   NTT DoCoMo
  
  on the
  
   WCDMA
  
  standard.
  

    [7]
   

  This was followed by 3.5G, 3G+ or turbo 3G enhancements based on the
  
   high-speed packet access
  
  (HSPA) family, allowing
  
   UMTS networks
  
  to have higher data transfer speeds and capacity.
 
  By 2009, it had become clear that, at some point, 3G networks would be overwhelmed by the growth of bandwidth-intensive applications, such as
  
   streaming media
  
  .
  

    [8]
   

  Consequently, the industry began looking to data-optimized fourth-generation technologies, with the promise of speed improvements up to ten-fold over existing 3G technologies. The first two commercially available technologies billed as
  
   4G
  
  were the
  
   WiMAX
  
  standard, offered in North America by
  
   Sprint
  
  , and the
  
   LTE
  
  standard, first offered in Scandinavia by
  
   TeliaSonera
  
  .
 

   Smartphones
  
  have a number of distinguishing features. The
  
   International Telecommunication Union
  
  measures those with Internet connection, which it calls
  
   Active Mobile-Broadband subscriptions
  
  (which includes tablets, etc.). In the developed world, smartphones have now overtaken the usage of earlier mobile systems. However, in the developing world, they account for around 50% of
  
   mobile telephony
  
  .
 
  There are
  
   Jewish orthodox
  
  religious restrictions which, by some interpretations, standard mobile telephones overstep. To deal with this problem, some rabbinical organizations have recommended that phones with text-messaging capability not be used by children.
  

    [10]
   


   Phones with restricted features
  
  are known as
  
   kosher
  
  phones and have
  
   rabbinical
  
  approval for use in Israel and elsewhere by observant
  
   Orthodox Jews
  
  . Although these phones are intended to prevent
  
   immodesty
  
  , some vendors report good sales to adults who prefer the simplicity of the devices. Some phones are approved for use by essential workers (such as health, security, and public service workers) on the
  
   sabbath
  
  , even though the use of any electrical device is generally prohibited during this time.
  

    [11]
   


  The common components found on all phones are:
 
  Low-end mobile phones are often referred to as
  
   feature phones
  
  and offer basic telephony. Handsets with more advanced computing ability through the use of native software applications are known as
  
   smartphones
  
  .
 
  In sound, smartphones and feature phones vary little. Some audio-quality enhancing features, such as
  
   Voice over LTE
  
  and
  
   HD Voice
  
  , have appeared and are often available on newer smartphones. Sound quality can remain a problem due to the design of the phone, the quality of the cellular network and compression algorithms used in
  
   long distance calls
  
  .
  

    [12]
   



    [13]
   

  Audio quality can be improved using a
  
   VoIP
  
  application over
  
   WiFi
  
  .
  

    [14]
   

  Cellphones have small speakers so that the user can use a
  
   speakerphone
  
  feature and talk to a person on the phone without holding it to their ear. The small speakers can also be used to listen to digital audio files of music or speech or watch videos with an audio component, without holding the phone close to the ear.
 

   GSM
  

   feature phones
  
  require a small
  
   microchip
  
  called a Subscriber Identity Module or
  
   SIM card
  
  , in order to function. The SIM card is approximately the size of a small postage stamp and is usually placed underneath the battery in the rear of the unit. The SIM securely stores the
  
   service-subscriber key (IMSI)
  
  and the
  
   K
   
    i
   

  used to identify and authenticate the user of the mobile phone. The SIM card allows users to change phones by simply removing the SIM card from one mobile phone and inserting it into another mobile phone or broadband telephony device, provided that this is not prevented by a
  
   SIM lock
  
  . The first SIM card was made in 1991 by Munich smart card maker
  
   Giesecke & Devrient
  
  for the Finnish wireless network operator
  
   Radiolinja
  
  .
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  A hybrid mobile phone can hold up to four
  
   SIM cards
  
  . SIM and
  
   R-UIM
  
  cards may be mixed together to allow both
  
   GSM
  
  and
  
   CDMA
  
  networks to be accessed.From 2010 onwards, such phones became popular in emerging markets,
  

    [15]
   

  and this was attributed to the desire to obtain the lowest on-net calling rate.
 
  A common data application on mobile phones is
  
   Short Message Service
  
  (SMS) text messaging. The first SMS message was sent from a computer to a mobile phone in 1992 in the UK while the first person-to-person SMS from phone to phone was sent in Finland in 1993. The first
  
   mobile news
  
  service, delivered via SMS, was launched in Finland in 2000,
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  and subsequently many organizations provided "on-demand" and "instant" news services by SMS.
  
   Multimedia Messaging Service
  
  (MMS) was introduced in 2001.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  From 1983 to 1998,
  
   Motorola
  
  was market leader in mobile phones.
  
   Nokia
  
  was the market leader in mobile phones from 1998 to 2012.
  

    [17]
   

  In Q1 2012,
  
   Samsung
  
  surpassed Nokia, selling 93.5 million units as against Nokia's 82.7 million units. Samsung has retained its top position since then. In Q2 2016, the top five manufacturers were Samsung (22.3%), Apple (12.9%), Huawei (8.9%), Oppo (5.4%), and Xiaomi (4.5%).
  

    [18]
   


  The world's largest individual mobile operator by number of subscribers is
  
   China Mobile
  
  , which has over 500 million mobile phone subscribers.
  

    [19]
   

  Over 50 mobile operators have over ten million subscribers each, and over 150 mobile operators had at least one million subscribers by the end of 2009.
  

    [20]
   

  In 2014, there were more than seven billion mobile phone subscribers worldwide, a number that is expected to keep growing.
 
  Mobile phones are used for a variety of purposes, such as keeping in touch with family members, for conducting business, and in order to have access to a telephone in the event of an emergency. Some people carry more than one mobile phone for different purposes, such as for business and personal use. Multiple SIM cards may be used to take advantage of the benefits of different calling plans. For example, a particular plan might provide for cheaper local calls, long-distance calls, international calls, or roaming.
 
  The mobile phone has been used in a variety of diverse contexts in society. For example:
 
  In 1998, one of the first examples of
  
   distributing and selling media content
  
  through the mobile phone was the sale of
  
   ringtones
  
  by
  
   Radiolinja
  
  in Finland. Soon afterwards, other media content appeared, such as news, video games, jokes, horoscopes, TV content and advertising. Most early content for mobile phones tended to be copies of
  
   legacy media
  
  , such as banner advertisements or TV news highlight video clips. Recently, unique content for mobile phones has been emerging, from ringtones and
  
   ringback tones
  
  to
  
   mobisodes
  
  , video content that has been produced exclusively for mobile phones.
 
  In many countries, mobile phones are used to provide
  
   mobile banking
  
  services, which may include the ability to transfer cash payments by secure SMS text message. Kenya's
  
   M-PESA
  
  mobile banking service, for example, allows customers of the mobile phone operator
  
   Safaricom
  
  to hold cash balances which are recorded on their SIM cards. Cash can be deposited or withdrawn from M-PESA accounts at Safaricom retail outlets located throughout the country and can be transferred electronically from person to person and used to pay bills to companies.
 

   Branchless banking
  
  has also been successful in South Africa and the
  
   Philippines
  
  . A pilot project in
  
   Bali
  
  was launched in 2011 by the
  
   International Finance Corporation
  
  and an
  
   Indonesian
  
  bank,
  
   Bank Mandiri
  
  .
  

    [29]
   


  Another application of mobile banking technology is
  
   Zidisha
  
  , a US-based nonprofit micro-lending platform that allows residents of developing countries to raise small business loans from Web users worldwide. Zidisha uses mobile banking for loan disbursements and repayments, transferring funds from lenders in the United States to borrowers in rural Africa who have mobile phones and can use the Internet.
  

    [30]
   


  Mobile payments were first trialled in Finland in 1998 when two Coca-Cola vending machines in
  
   Espoo
  
  were enabled to work with SMS payments. Eventually, the idea spread and in 1999, the Philippines launched the country's first commercial mobile payments systems with mobile operators
  
   Globe
  
  and
  
   Smart
  
  .
 
  Some mobile phones can make
  
   mobile payments
  
  via direct mobile billing schemes, or through
  
   contactless payments
  
  if the phone and the
  
   point of sale
  
  support
  
   near field communication
  
  (NFC).
  

    [31]
   

  Enabling contactless payments through NFC-equipped mobile phones requires the co-operation of manufacturers, network operators, and retail merchants.
  

    [32]
   



    [33]
   



    [34]
   


  Mobile phones are commonly used to collect location data. While the phone is turned on, the geographical location of a mobile phone can be determined easily (whether it is being used or not) using a technique known as
  
   multilateration
  
  to calculate the differences in time for a signal to travel from the mobile phone to each of several
  
   cell towers
  
  near the owner of the phone.
  

    [35]
   



    [36]
   


  The movements of a mobile phone user can be tracked by their service provider and if desired, by law enforcement agencies and their governments. Both the
  
   SIM card
  
  and the handset can be tracked.
  

    [35]
   


  China has proposed using this technology to track the commuting patterns of Beijing city residents.
  

    [37]
   

  In the UK and US, law enforcement and intelligence services use mobile phones to perform surveillance operations. They possess technology that enables them to activate the microphones in mobile phones remotely in order to listen to conversations which take place near the phone.
  

    [38]
   



    [39]
   


  Hackers are able to track a phone's location, read messages, and record calls, just by knowing the phone number.
  

    [40]
   


  Mobile phone use while driving, including talking on the phone, texting, or operating other phone features, is common but controversial. It is widely considered dangerous due to
  
   distracted driving
  
  . Being distracted while operating a motor vehicle has been shown to increase the risk of accidents. In September 2010, the US
  
   National Highway Traffic Safety Administration
  
  (NHTSA) reported that 995 people were killed by
  
   drivers distracted by cell phones
  
  . In March 2011, a US insurance company,
  
   State Farm Insurance
  
  , announced the results of a study which showed 19% of drivers surveyed accessed the Internet on a smartphone while driving.
  

    [41]
   

  Many jurisdictions prohibit the use of mobile phones while driving. In Egypt, Israel, Japan, Portugal, and Singapore, both handheld and hands-free use of a mobile phone (which uses a
  
   speakerphone
  
  ) is banned. In other countries, including the UK and France and in many
  
   U.S. states
  
  , only handheld phone use is banned while hands-free use is permitted.
 
  A 2011 study reported that over 90% of college students surveyed text (initiate, reply or read) while driving.
  

    [42]
   

  The scientific literature on the dangers of driving while sending a text message from a mobile phone, or
  

    texting while driving
   

  , is limited. A simulation study at the
  
   University of Utah
  
  found a sixfold increase in distraction-related accidents when texting.
  

    [43]
   


  Due to the increasing complexity of mobile phones, they are often more like mobile computers in their available uses. This has introduced additional difficulties for law enforcement officials when attempting to distinguish one usage from another in drivers using their devices. This is more apparent in countries which ban both handheld and hands-free usage, rather than those which ban handheld use only, as officials cannot easily tell which function of the mobile phone is being used simply by looking at the driver. This can lead to drivers being stopped for using their device illegally for a phone call when, in fact, they were using the device legally, for example, when using the phone's incorporated controls for car stereo,
  
   GPS
  
  or
  
   satnav
  
  .
 
  A 2010 study reviewed the incidence of mobile phone use while
  
   cycling
  
  and its effects on behaviour and safety.
  

    [44]
   

  In 2013, a national survey in the US reported the number of drivers who reported using their cellphones to access the Internet while driving had risen to nearly one of four.
  

    [45]
   

  A study conducted by the University of Illinois examined approaches for reducing inappropriate and problematic use of mobile phones, such as using mobile phones while driving.
  

    [46]
   


  Accidents involving a driver being distracted by talking on a mobile phone have begun to be prosecuted as negligence similar to speeding. In the
  
   United Kingdom
  
  , from 27 February 2007, motorists who are caught using a hand-held mobile phone while driving will have three penalty points added to their license in addition to the fine of
  
   £
  
  60.
  

    [47]
   

  This increase was introduced to try to stem the increase in drivers ignoring the law.
  

    [48]
   


   Japan
  
  prohibits all mobile phone use while driving, including use of hands-free devices. New Zealand has banned hand-held cell phone use since 1 November 2009. Many states in the United States have banned texting on cell phones while driving. Illinois became the 17th American state to enforce this law.
  

    [49]
   

  As of July 2010, 30 states had banned texting while driving, with Kentucky becoming the most recent addition on July 15.
  

    [50]
   



   Public Health Law Research
  
  maintains a list of distracted driving laws in the United States. This database of laws provides a comprehensive view of the provisions of laws that restrict the use of mobile communication devices while driving for all 50 states and the District of Columbia between 1992 when first law was passed, through December 1, 2010. The dataset contains information on 22 dichotomous, continuous or categorical variables including, for example, activities regulated (e.g., texting versus talking, hands-free versus handheld), targeted populations, and exemptions.
  

    [51]
   


  The effect of mobile phone radiation on human health is the subject of recent interest and study, as a result of the enormous increase in mobile phone usage throughout the world. Mobile phones use
  
   electromagnetic radiation
  
  in the
  
   microwave
  
  range, which some believe may be harmful to human health. A large body of research exists, both
  
   epidemiological
  
  and experimental, in
  
   non-human animals
  
  and in humans. The majority of this research shows no definite causative relationship between exposure to mobile phones and harmful biological effects in humans. This is often paraphrased simply as the balance of evidence showing no harm to humans from mobile phones, although a significant number of individual studies do suggest such a relationship, or are inconclusive. Other
  
   digital wireless systems
  
  , such as data communication networks, produce similar radiation.
 
  On 31 May 2011, the
  
   World Health Organization
  
  stated that mobile phone use may possibly represent a long-term health risk,
  

    [52]
   



    [53]
   

  classifying mobile phone radiation as "possibly carcinogenic to humans" after a team of scientists reviewed studies on mobile phone safety.
  

    [54]
   

  The mobile phone is in
  
   category 2B
  
  , which ranks it alongside
  
   coffee
  
  and other possibly carcinogenic substances.
  

    [55]
   



    [56]
   


  Some recent studies have found an association between mobile phone use and certain kinds of brain and salivary gland tumors.
  
   Lennart Hardell
  
  and other authors of a 2009 meta-analysis of 11 studies from peer-reviewed journals concluded that cell phone usage for at least ten years "approximately doubles the risk of being diagnosed with a brain tumor on the same ('ipsilateral') side of the head as that preferred for cell phone use".
  

    [57]
   


  One study of past mobile phone use cited in the report showed a "40% increased risk for
  
   gliomas
  
  (brain cancer) in the highest category of heavy users (reported average: 30 minutes per day over a 10‐year period)".
  

    [58]
   

  This is a reversal of the study's prior position that cancer was unlikely to be caused by cellular phones or their base stations and that reviews had found no convincing evidence for other health effects.
  

    [53]
   



    [59]
   

  However, a study published 24 March 2012, in the
  

    British Medical Journal
   

  questioned these estimates because the increase in brain cancers has not paralleled the increase in mobile phone use.
  

    [60]
   

  Certain countries, including France, have warned against the use of mobile phones by minors in particular, due to health risk uncertainties.
  

    [61]
   

  Mobile pollution by transmitting electromagnetic waves can be decreased up to 90% by adopting the circuit as designed in mobile phone (MS) and mobile exchange (BTS, MSC etc.).
  

    [62]
   


  In May 2016, preliminary findings of a long-term study by the U.S. government suggested that radio-frequency (RF) radiation, the type emitted by cell phones, can cause cancer.
  

    [63]
   



    [64]
   


  A study by the London School of Economics found that banning mobile phones in schools could increase pupils' academic performance, providing benefits equal to one extra week of schooling per year.
  

    [65]
   


  Studies have shown that around 40-50% of the environmental impact of mobile phones occurs during the manufacture of their printed wiring boards and integrated circuits.
  

    [66]
   


  The average user replaces their mobile phone every 11 to 18 months,
  

    [67]
   

  and the discarded phones then contribute to
  
   electronic waste
  
  . Mobile phone manufacturers within
  
   Europe
  
  are subject to the
  
   WEEE directive
  
  , and Australia has introduced a mobile phone recycling scheme.
  

    [68]
   



   Apple Inc.
  
  had an advanced robotic disassembler and sorter called Liam specifically for recycling outdated or broken iPhones.
  

    [350]
   


  According to the
  
   Federal Communications Commission
  
  , one out of three robberies involve the theft of a cellular phone.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  Police data in San Francisco show that half of all robberies in 2012 were thefts of cellular phones.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  An online petition on
  
   Change.org
  
  , called
  
   Secure our Smartphones
  
  , urged smartphone manufacturers to install
  
   kill switches
  
  in their devices to make them unusable if stolen. The petition is part of a joint effort by New York Attorney General
  
   Eric Schneiderman
  
  and San Francisco District Attorney
  
   George Gascón
  
  and was directed to the
  
   CEOs
  
  of the major smartphone manufacturers and telecommunication carriers.
  

    [69]
   


  On Monday, 10 June 2013, Apple announced that it would install a "
  
   kill switch
  
  " on its
  
   next iPhone operating system
  
  , due to debut in October 2013.
  

    [70]
   


  All mobile phones have a unique identifier called
  
   IMEI
  
  . Anyone can report their phone as lost or stolen with their Telecom Carrier, and the IMEI would be blacklisted with a central registry.
  

    [71]
   

  Telecom carriers, depending upon local regulation can or must implement blocking of blacklisted phones in their network. There are, however, a number of ways to circumvent a blacklist. One method is to send the phone to a country where the telecom carriers are not required to implement the blacklisting and sell it there,
  

    [72]
   

  another involves altering the phone's IMEI number.
  

    [73]
   

  Even so, blacklisted phones typically have less value on the second-hand market if the phones original IMEI is blacklisted.
 
  5G is a technology and term used in research papers and projects to denote the next major phase in mobile telecommunication standards beyond the
  
   4G
  
  /
  
   IMT-Advanced
  
  standards. The term 5G is not officially used in any specification or official document yet made public by telecommunication companies or standardization bodies such as
  
   3GPP
  
  ,
  
   WiMAX
  
  Forum or
  
   ITU-R
  
  . New standards beyond 4G are currently being developed by standardization bodies, but they are at this time seen as under the 4G umbrella, not for a new mobile generation.
 
  Demand for metals used in mobile phones and other electronics fuelled the
  
   Second Congo War
  
  , which claimed almost 5.5 million lives.
  

    [74]
   

  In a 2012 news story,
  

    The Guardian
   

  reported: "In unsafe mines deep underground in eastern Congo,
  
   children are working
  
  to extract minerals essential for the electronics industry. The profits from the minerals finance the bloodiest conflict since the second world war; the war has lasted nearly 20 years and has recently flared up again. ... For the last 15 years, the
  
   Democratic Republic of the Congo
  
  has been a major source of natural resources for the mobile phone industry."
  

    [75]
   


  The company
  
   Fairphone
  
  has worked to develop a mobile phone that does not contain
  
   conflict minerals
  
  .
 