


   MS-DOS
  
  (
  


     /
     

       ˌ
      

       ɛ
      

       m
      

       ɛ
      

       s
      

       ˈ
      

       d
      

       ɒ
      

       s
      

     /
    








        EM
       


     -es-
     


        DOSS
       





  ; acronym for
  

    M
   
   icro
   
    s
   
   oft
   
    D
   
   isk
   
    O
   
   perating
   
    S
   
   ystem
  
  ) is a discontinued
  
   operating system
  
  for
  
   x86
  
  -based
  
   personal computers
  
  mostly developed by
  
   Microsoft
  
  . It was the most commonly used member of the
  
   DOS
  
  family of operating systems, and was the main operating system for
  
   IBM PC compatible
  
  personal computers during the 1980s and the early 1990s, when it was gradually superseded by operating systems offering a
  
   graphical user interface
  
  (GUI), in various generations of the graphical
  
   Microsoft Windows
  
  operating system by Microsoft Corporation.
 
  MS-DOS resulted from a request in 1981 by IBM for an operating system to use in its
  
   IBM PC
  
  range of personal computers.
  

    [7]
   



    [8]
   

  Microsoft quickly bought the rights to
  
   86-DOS
  
  from
  
   Seattle Computer Products
  
  ,
  

    [9]
   

  and began work on modifying it to meet IBM's specification. IBM licensed and released it in August 1981 as
  
   PC DOS
  
  1.0 for use in their PCs. Although MS-DOS and PC DOS were initially developed in parallel by Microsoft and IBM, in subsequent years, the two products diverged, with recognizable differences in compatibility, syntax, and capabilities.
 
  During its life,
  
   several competing products
  
  were released for the x86 platform,
  

    [10]
   

  and MS-DOS went through eight versions, until development ceased in 2000.
  

    [11]
   

  Initially MS-DOS was targeted at
  
   Intel 8086
  
  processors running on computer hardware using
  
   floppy disks
  
  to store and access not only the operating system, but application software and user data as well. Progressive version releases delivered support for other mass storage media in ever greater sizes and formats, along with added feature support for newer processors and rapidly evolving computer architectures. Ultimately it was the key product in Microsoft's growth from a
  
   programming languages
  
  company to a diverse software development firm, providing the company with essential revenue and marketing resources. It was also the underlying basic operating system on which early versions of Windows ran as a GUI. It is a flexible operating system, and consumes negligible installation space.
 


  MS-DOS was a renamed form of
  
   86-DOS
  


    [12]
   

  –  owned by
  
   Seattle Computer Products
  
  , written by
  
   Tim Paterson
  
  . Development of 86-DOS took only six weeks, as it was basically a clone of
  
   Digital Research
  
  's
  
   CP/M
  
  (for 8080/Z80 processors), ported to run on
  
   8086
  
  processors and with two notable differences compared to CP/M; an improved disk sector buffering logic and the introduction of
  
   FAT12
  
  instead of the CP/M filesystem. This first version was shipped in August 1980.
  

    [5]
   

  Microsoft, which needed an operating system for the
  
   IBM Personal Computer
  


    [7]
   



    [8]
   

  hired Tim Paterson in May 1981 and bought 86-DOS 1.10 for $75,000 in July of the same year. Microsoft kept the version number, but renamed it MS-DOS. They also licensed MS-DOS 1.10/1.14 to IBM, who, in August 1981, offered it as
  
   PC DOS
  
  1.0 as one of three operating systems
  

    [13]
   

  for the
  
   IBM 5150
  
  , or the
  
   IBM PC
  
  .
  

    [5]
   


  Within a year Microsoft licensed MS-DOS to over 70 other companies.
  

    [14]
   

  It was designed to be an OS that could run on any 8086-family computer. Each computer would have its own distinct hardware and its own version of MS-DOS, similar to the situation that existed for
  
   CP/M
  
  , and with MS-DOS emulating the
  
   same solution
  
  as CP/M to adapt for different hardware platforms. To this end, MS-DOS was designed with a modular structure with internal device drivers, minimally for primary disk drives and the console, integrated with the kernel and loaded by the boot loader, and installable device drivers for other devices loaded and integrated at boot time. The
  
   OEM
  
  would use a development kit provided by Microsoft to build a version of MS-DOS with their basic I/O drivers and a standard Microsoft kernel, which they would typically supply on disk to end users along with the hardware. Thus, there were many different versions of "MS-DOS" for different hardware, and there is a major distinction between an IBM-compatible (or ISA) machine and an MS-DOS [compatible] machine. Some machines, like the
  
   Tandy 2000
  
  , were MS-DOS compatible but not IBM-compatible, so they could run software written exclusively for MS-DOS without dependence on the peripheral hardware of the IBM PC architecture.
 
  This design would have worked well for compatibility, if application programs had only used MS-DOS services to perform device I/O, and indeed the same design philosophy is embodied in Windows NT (see
  
   Hardware Abstraction Layer
  
  ). However, in MS-DOS's early days, the greater speed attainable by programs through direct control of hardware was of particular importance, especially for games, which often pushed the limits of their contemporary hardware. Very soon an IBM-compatible architecture became the goal, and before long all 8086-family computers
  
   closely emulated IBM's hardware
  
  , and only a single version of MS-DOS for a fixed hardware platform was needed for the market. This version is the version of MS-DOS that is discussed here, as the dozens of other OEM versions of "MS-DOS" were only relevant to the systems they were designed for, and in any case were very similar in function and capability to some standard version for the IBM PC—often the same-numbered version, but not always, since some OEMs used their own proprietary version numbering schemes (e.g. labeling later releases of MS-DOS 1.x as 2.0 or vice versa)—with a few notable exceptions.
 
  Microsoft omitted
  
   multi-user
  
  support from MS-DOS because Microsoft's
  
   Unix
  
  -based operating system,
  
   Xenix
  
  , was fully multi-user.
  

    [15]
   

  The company planned to over time improve MS-DOS so it would be almost indistinguishable from single-user Xenix, or
  
   XEDOS
  
  , which would also run on the
  
   Motorola 68000
  
  ,
  
   Zilog Z8000
  
  , and the
  
   LSI-11
  
  ; they would be
  
   upwardly compatible
  
  with Xenix, which
  

    Byte
   

  in 1983 described as "the multi-user MS-DOS of the future".
  

    [16]
   



    [17]
   

  Microsoft advertised MS-DOS and Xenix together, listing the shared features of its "single-user OS" and "the multi-user,
  
   multi-tasking
  
  ,
  
   UNIX
  
  -derived operating system", and promising easy porting between them.
  

    [18]
   

  After the
  
   breakup of the Bell System
  
  , however,
  
   AT&T Computer Systems
  
  started selling
  
   UNIX System V
  
  . Believing that it could not compete with AT&T in the Unix market, Microsoft abandoned Xenix, and in 1987 transferred ownership of Xenix to the
  
   Santa Cruz Operation
  
  (SCO).
 
  On 25 March 2014, Microsoft made the code to
  
   SCP MS-DOS 1.25
  
  and a mixture of
  
   Altos MS-DOS 2.11
  
  and
  
   TeleVideo PC DOS 2.11
  
  available to the public under the
  
   Microsoft Research License Agreement
  
  , which makes the code
  
   source-available
  
  , but not
  
   open source
  
  as defined by
  
   Open Source Initiative
  
  or
  
   Free Software Foundation
  
  standards.
  

    [2]
   



    [3]
   



    [4]
   



    [19]
   


  As an
  
   April Fools
  
  joke in 2015,
  
   Microsoft Mobile
  
  launched a
  
   Windows Phone
  
  application called
  
   MS-DOS Mobile
  
  which was presented as a new mobile operating system and worked similar to MS-DOS.
  

    [20]
   



























































































































  Microsoft licensed or released versions of MS-DOS under different names like
  
   Lifeboat Associates
  
  "Software Bus 86"
  

    [21]
   

  aka
  
   SB-DOS
  
  ,
  

    [10]
   


   COMPAQ-DOS
  
  ,
  

    [21]
   


   NCR-DOS
  
  or
  
   Z-DOS
  


    [10]
   

  before it eventually enforced the MS-DOS name for all versions but the IBM one, which was originally called "IBM Personal Computer DOS", later shortened to
  
   IBM PC DOS
  
  . (Competitors released compatible DOS systems such as
  
   DR DOS
  
  and
  
   PTS-DOS
  
  that could also run DOS applications.)
 
  The following versions of MS-DOS were released to the public:
  

    [22]
   



    [23]
   


  Microsoft DOS was released through the OEM channel, until DRI released DR DOS 5.0 as a retail upgrade. With PC DOS 5.00.1, the IBM-Microsoft agreement started to end, and IBM entered the retail DOS market with IBM DOS 5.00.1, 5.02, 6.00 and PC DOS 6.1, 6.3, 7, 2000 and 7.1.
 
  Localized versions of MS-DOS existed for different markets.
  

    [32]
   

  While Western issues of MS-DOS evolved around the same set of tools and drivers just with localized message languages and differing sets of supported codepages and keyboard layouts, some language versions were considerably different from Western issues and were adapted to run on localized PC hardware with additional BIOS services not available in Western PCs, support multiple hardware codepages for displays and printers, support DBCS, alternative input methods and graphics output. Affected issues include Japanese (
  
   DOS/V
  
  ), Korean, Arabic (ADOS 3.3/5.0), Hebrew (HDOS 3.3/5.0), Russian (
  
   RDOS 4.01
  
  /
  
   5.0
  
  ) as well as some other Eastern European versions of DOS.
 
  On microcomputers based on the Intel
  
   8086
  
  and
  
   8088
  
  processors, including the IBM PC and clones, the initial competition to the PC DOS/MS-DOS line came from
  
   Digital Research
  
  , whose
  
   CP/M
  
  operating system had inspired MS-DOS. In fact, there remains controversy as to whether QDOS was more or less plagiarised from early versions of CP/M code. Digital Research released
  
   CP/M-86
  
  a few months after MS-DOS, and it was offered as an alternative to MS-DOS and Microsoft's licensing requirements, but at a higher price.
  
   Executable programs
  
  for CP/M-86 and MS-DOS were not interchangeable with each other; many
  
   applications
  
  were sold in both MS-DOS and CP/M-86 versions until MS-DOS became preponderant (later Digital Research operating systems could run both MS-DOS and CP/M-86 software). MS-DOS originally supported the simple
  
   .COM
  
  , which was modelled after a similar but binary incompatible format known from
  
   CP/M-80
  
  . CP/M-86 instead supported a relocatable format using the
  
   file extension
  

   .CMD
  
  to avoid name conflicts with CP/M-80 and MS-DOS .COM files. MS-DOS version 1.0 added a more advanced relocatable .
  
   EXE
  
  executable file format.
 
  Most of the machines in the early days of MS-DOS had differing system architectures and there was a certain degree of incompatibility, and subsequently
  
   vendor lock-in
  
  . Users who began using MS-DOS with their machines were compelled to continue using the version customized for their hardware, or face trying to get all of their proprietary hardware and software to work with the new system.
 
  In the business world the 808x-based machines that MS-DOS was tied to faced competition from the
  
   Unix
  
  operating system which ran on many different hardware architectures. Microsoft itself sold a version of Unix for the PC called
  
   Xenix
  
  .
 
  In the emerging world of home users, a variety of other computers based on various other processors were in serious competition with the IBM PC: the
  
   Apple II
  
  , early
  
   Apple Macintosh
  
  , the
  
   Commodore 64
  
  and others did not use the 808x processor; many 808x machines of different architectures used custom versions of MS-DOS. At first all these machines were in competition. In time the IBM PC hardware configuration became dominant in the 808x market as software written to communicate directly with the PC hardware without using standard operating system calls ran much faster, but on true PC-compatibles only. Non-PC-compatible 808x machines were too small a market to have fast software written for them alone, and the market remained open only for IBM PCs and machines that closely imitated their architecture, all running either a single version of MS-DOS compatible only with PCs, or the equivalent IBM PC DOS. Most clones cost much less than IBM-branded machines of similar performance, and became widely used by home users, while IBM PCs had a large share of the business computer market.
 
  Microsoft and IBM together began what was intended as the follow-on to MS-DOS/PC DOS, called
  
   OS/2
  
  . When OS/2 was released in 1987, Microsoft began an advertising campaign announcing that "DOS is Dead" and stating that version 4 was the last full release. OS/2 was designed for efficient multi-tasking (as was standard in operating systems since 1963) and offered a number of advanced features that had been designed together with similar
  
   look and feel
  
  ; it was seen as the legitimate heir to the "kludgy" DOS platform.
 
  MS-DOS had grown in spurts, with many significant features being taken or duplicated from Microsoft's other products and operating systems. MS-DOS also grew by incorporating, by direct licensing or feature duplicating, the functionality of tools and utilities developed by independent companies, such as
  
   Norton Utilities
  
  ,
  
   PC Tools
  
  (
  
   Microsoft Anti-Virus
  
  ),
  
   QEMM
  
  expanded memory manager,
  
   Stacker
  

   disk compression
  
  , and others.
 
  During the period when Digital Research was competing in the operating system market some computers, like
  
   Amstrad PC1512
  
  , were sold with floppy disks for two operating systems (only one of which could be used at a time), MS-DOS and CP/M-86 or a derivative of it. Digital Research produced
  
   DOS Plus
  
  , which was compatible with MS-DOS 2.11, supported CP/M-86 programs, had additional features including multi-tasking, and could read and write disks in CP/M and MS-DOS format.
 
  While OS/2 was under protracted development, Digital Research released the MS-DOS compatible
  
   DR DOS
  
  5.0, which included features only available as third-party add-ons for MS-DOS. Unwilling to lose any portion of the market, Microsoft responded by announcing the "pending" release of MS-DOS 5.0 in May 1990. This effectively killed most DR DOS sales until the actual release of MS-DOS 5.0 in June 1991. Digital Research brought out DR DOS 6.0, which sold well until the "pre-announcement" of MS-DOS 6.0 again stifled the sales of DR DOS.
 
  Microsoft had been accused of carefully orchestrating leaks about future versions of MS-DOS in an attempt to create what in the industry is called FUD (
  
   fear, uncertainty, and doubt
  
  ) regarding DR DOS. For example, in October 1990, shortly after the release of DR DOS 5.0, and long before the eventual June 1991 release of MS-DOS 5.0, stories on feature enhancements in MS-DOS started to appear in
  
   InfoWorld
  
  and
  
   PC Week
  
  . Brad Silverberg, then Vice President of Systems Software at Microsoft and General Manager of its Windows and MS-DOS Business Unit, wrote a forceful letter to
  
   PC Week
  
  (November 5, 1990), denying that Microsoft was engaged in FUD tactics ("to serve our customers better, we decided to be more forthcoming about version 5.0") and denying that Microsoft copied features from DR DOS:
 
   "The feature enhancements of MS-DOS version 5.0 were decided and development was begun long before we heard about DR DOS 5.0. There will be some similar features. With 50 million MS-DOS users, it shouldn't be surprising that DRI has heard some of the same requests from customers that we have." – (Schulman et al. 1994).
   

     [33]
    


  The pact between Microsoft and IBM to promote OS/2 began to fall apart in 1990 when
  
   Windows 3.0
  
  became a marketplace success. Much of Microsoft's further contributions to OS/2 also went into creating a third
  
   GUI
  
  replacement for DOS,
  
   Windows NT
  
  .
 
  IBM, which had already been developing the next version of OS/2, carried on development of the platform without Microsoft and sold it as the alternative to DOS and Windows.
 
  As a response to
  
   Digital Research
  
  's
  
   DR DOS
  
  6.0, which bundled SuperStor disk compression, Microsoft opened negotiations with
  
   Stac Electronics
  
  , vendor of the most popular DOS disk compression tool, Stacker. In the
  
   due diligence
  
  process, Stac engineers had shown Microsoft part of the Stacker source code. Stac was unwilling to meet Microsoft's terms for licensing Stacker and withdrew from the negotiations. Microsoft chose to license Vertisoft's DoubleDisk, using it as the core for its DoubleSpace disk compression.
  

    [34]
   


  MS-DOS 6.0 and 6.20 were released in 1993, both including the Microsoft DoubleSpace disk compression utility program. Stac successfully sued Microsoft for
  
   patent
  
  infringement regarding the compression algorithm used in DoubleSpace. This resulted in the 1994 release of MS-DOS 6.21, which had disk-compression removed. Shortly afterwards came version 6.22, with a new version of the disk compression system, DriveSpace, which had a different compression algorithm to avoid the infringing code.
 
  Prior to 1995, Microsoft licensed MS-DOS (and Windows) to computer manufacturers under three types of agreement: per-processor (a fee for each system the company sold), per-system (a fee for each system of a particular model), or per-copy (a fee for each copy of MS-DOS installed). The largest manufacturers used the per-processor arrangement, which had the lowest fee. This arrangement made it expensive for the large manufacturers to migrate to any other operating system, such as DR DOS. In 1991, the U.S. government
  
   Federal Trade Commission
  
  began investigating Microsoft's licensing procedures, resulting in a 1994 settlement agreement limiting Microsoft to per-copy licensing. Digital Research did not gain by this settlement, and years later its successor in interest,
  
   Caldera
  
  , sued Microsoft for damages in the
  

    Caldera v. Microsoft
   

  lawsuit. It was believed that the settlement ran in the order of $150 million, but was revealed in November 2009 with the release of the Settlement Agreement to be $280 million.
  

    [35]
   


  Microsoft also used a variety of tactics in MS-DOS and several of their applications and development tools that, while operating perfectly when running on genuine MS-DOS (and PC DOS), would break when run on another vendor's implementation of DOS. Notable examples of this practice included:
 
  With the release of
  
   Windows 95
  
  (and continuing in the
  
   Windows 9x
  
  product line through to
  
   Windows ME
  
  ), an integrated version of MS-DOS was used for
  
   bootstrapping
  
  , troubleshooting, and backwards-compatibility with old DOS software, particularly games, and no longer released as a standalone product. In Windows 95, the DOS, called MS-DOS 7, can be booted separately, without the Windows GUI; this capability was retained through Windows 98 Second Edition. Windows ME removed the capability to boot its underlying MS-DOS 8.0 alone from a hard disk, but retained the ability to make a DOS boot floppy disk (called an "Emergency Boot Disk") and can be hacked to restore full access to the underlying DOS.
 
  In contrast to the Windows 9x series, the
  
   Windows NT
  
  -derived 32-bit operating systems developed alongside the 9x series (Windows
  
   NT
  
  ,
  
   2000
  
  ,
  
   XP
  
  and newer) do not contain MS-DOS as part of the operating system, but provide a subset of DOS emulation to run DOS applications and provide DOS-like command prompt windows.
  
   64-bit
  
  versions of Windows NT line do not provide DOS emulation and cannot run DOS applications natively.
  

    [36]
   


   Windows XP
  
  contains a copy of the
  
   Windows ME
  
  boot disk, stripped down to bootstrap only. This is accessible only by formatting a floppy as an "MS-DOS startup disk". Files like the driver for the CD-ROM support were deleted from the Windows ME bootdisk and the startup files (
  
   AUTOEXEC.BAT
  
  and
  
   CONFIG.SYS
  
  ) no longer had content. This modified disk was the base for creating the MS-DOS image for Windows XP. Some of the deleted files can be recovered with an undelete tool.
  

    [37]
   

  With
  
   Windows Vista
  
  the files on the startup disk are dated 18 April 2005 but are otherwise unchanged, including the string "MS-DOS Version 8 © Copyright 1981–1999 Microsoft Corp" inside
  

    COMMAND.COM
   

  . Starting with Windows 10, the ability to create a DOS startup disk has been removed.
 
  The only versions of MS-DOS currently recognized as stand-alone OSs and supported as such by Microsoft are MS-DOS 6.0 and 6.22, both of which remain available for download via their
  
   MSDN
  
  , volume license, and OEM license partner websites, for customers with valid login credentials. MS-DOS is still used in embedded x86 systems due to its simple architecture and minimal memory and processor requirements, though some current products have switched to the still-maintained open-source alternative
  
   FreeDOS
  
  .
 
  All versions of
  
   Microsoft Windows
  
  have had an MS-DOS-like
  
   command-line interface
  
  (CLI). This could run many DOS and variously Win32, OS/2 1.x and
  
   POSIX
  
  command line utilities in the same command-line session, allowing piping between commands. The user interface, and the icon up to Windows 2000, followed the native MS-DOS interface.
 
  The
  
   16-bit
  
  versions of Windows (up to 3.11) ran as a Graphical User Interface (GUI) on top of MS-DOS. With
  
   Windows 95
  
  , 98, 98 SE and ME, the MS-DOS part was (superficially) integrated, treating both operating systems as a complete package, though the DOS component could actually stand alone. The command line accessed the DOS command line (usually
  
   COMMAND.COM
  
  ), through a Windows module (WINOLDAP.MOD).
  
   [
   


      clarification needed
     


   ]
  

  A new line of Windows, (Windows NT), boot through a kernel whose sole purpose is to load Windows. One can not run Win32 applications in the loader system in the manner that OS/2, UNIX or Consumer Windows can launch character mode sessions.
 
  The command session permits running of various supported command line utilities from Win32, MS-DOS, OS/2 1.x and POSIX. The emulators for MS-DOS, OS/2 and POSIX use the host's window in the same way that Win16 applications use the Win32 explorer. Using the host's window allows one to pipe output between emulations.
 
  The MS-DOS emulation is done through the
  
   NTVDM
  
  (NT Virtual DOS Machine). This is a modified SoftPC (a former product similar to VirtualPC), running a modified MS-DOS 5 (NTIO.SYS and NTDOS.SYS). The output is handled by the console DLLs, so that the program at the prompt (
  
   CMD.EXE
  
  ,
  
   4NT.EXE
  
  ,
  
   TCC.EXE
  
  ), can see the output. 64-bit Windows does not have either the DOS emulation, or the DOS commands (EDIT, DEBUG,
  
   EDLIN
  
  ), that come with 32-bit Windows.
 
  The DOS version returns 5.00 or 5.50, depending on which API function is used to determine it. Utilities from MS-DOS 5.00 run in this emulation without modification. The very early beta programs of NT show MS-DOS 30.00, but programs running in MS-DOS 30.00 would assume that OS/2 was in control.
 
  The OS/2 emulation is handled through OS2SS.EXE and OS2.EXE, and DOSCALLS.DLL. OS2.EXE is a version of the OS/2 shell (CMD.EXE), which passes commands down to the OS2SS.EXE, and input-output to the Windows NT shell. Windows 2000 was the last version of NT to support OS/2. The emulation is OS/2 1.30.
 
  POSIX is emulated through the POSIX shell, but no emulated shell; the commands are handled directly in CMD.EXE.
 
  The Command Prompt is often called the MS-DOS prompt. In part, this was the official name for it in Windows 9x and early versions of Windows NT (NT 3.5 and earlier), and in part because the SoftPC emulation of DOS redirects output into it. Actually only
  
   COMMAND.COM
  
  and other 16bit commands run in a NTVDM with
  
   AUTOEXEC.NT
  
  and
  
   CONFIG.NT
  
  initialisation determined by
  

    _default.pif
   

  , optionally permitting the use of
  
   Win32 console
  
  applications and internal commands with a
  
   NTCMDPROMPT
  
  directive.
 

   Win32 console
  
  applications use
  
   CMD.EXE
  
  as their command prompt shell. This confusion does not exist under OS/2 because there are separate DOS and OS/2 prompts, and running a DOS program under OS/2 will launch a separate DOS window to run the application.
 
  All versions of Windows for
  
   Itanium
  
  (no longer sold by Microsoft) and
  
   x86-64
  
  architectures no longer include the NTVDM and can therefore no longer natively run MS-DOS or 16-bit Windows applications. There are alternatives in the form of
  
   virtual machine
  
  emulators such as Microsoft's own
  
   Virtual PC
  
  , as well as
  
   VMware
  
  ,
  
   DOSBox
  
  , and others.
 
  From 1983 onwards, various companies worked on
  
   graphical user interfaces
  
  (GUIs) capable of running on PC hardware. However, this required duplicated effort and did not provide much consistency in interface design (even between products from the same company).
 
  Later, in 1985,
  
   Microsoft Windows
  
  was released as Microsoft's first attempt at providing a consistent user interface (for applications). The early versions of Windows ran on top of MS-DOS. At first Windows met with little success, but this was also true for most other companies' efforts as well, for example
  
   GEM
  
  . After version 3.0, Windows gained market acceptance.
 

   Windows 9x
  
  used the DOS boot process to launch into protected mode. Basic features related to the file system, such as long file names, were only available to DOS when running as a subsystem of Windows.
  
   Windows NT
  
  runs independently of DOS but includes
  
   NTVDM
  
  , a component for simulating a DOS environment for legacy applications.
 
  MS-DOS compatible systems include:
 
  Microsoft manufactured
  
   IBM PC DOS
  
  for IBM. It and MS-DOS were identical products that eventually diverged starting with PC DOS version 6.1.
 

   Digital Research
  
  's DR-DOS is sometimes regarded as a clone of MS-DOS, but it did not follow Microsoft's version numbering scheme. For example, MS-DOS 4, released in July 1988, was followed by DR DOS 5.0 in May 1990. MS-DOS 5.0 came in April 1991, with DR DOS 6.0 being released the following June.
  

    [38]
   


  These products are collectively referred to as "DOS," even though "Disk Operating System" is a generic term used on other systems unrelated to the x86 and IBM PC. "MS-DOS" can also be a generic reference to DOS on IBM PC compatible computers.
 
  What made the difference in the end was Microsoft's control of the Windows platform and their programming practices which intentionally made Windows appear as if it ran poorly on competing versions of DOS.
  

    [33]
   

  Digital Research had to release interim releases to circumvent Windows limitations inserted artificially,
  

    [33]
   

  designed specifically to provide Microsoft with an unfair competitive advantage.
  

    [33]
   



   MS-DOS 6 Technical Reference at Microsoft TechNet
  
