


   Microsoft Store
  
  is a chain of
  
   retail stores
  
  and an online shopping site, owned and operated by
  
   Microsoft
  
  and dealing in computers, computer software and consumer electronics. The stores aim to "improve the PC and Microsoft retail purchase experience for consumers worldwide and help consumers make more informed decisions about their PC and software purchases."
  

    [2]
   


  The Microsoft Store offers Signature PCs and
  
   tablets
  
  like the
  
   Microsoft Surface
  
  and from third parties such as
  
   HP
  
  ,
  
   Acer
  
  ,
  
   Dell
  
  ,
  
   Lenovo
  
  , and
  
   Sony
  
  without demos or trialware (pre-installed free trials of certain third-party software that expire after a limited time). It also offers
  
   Windows
  
  (most retail versions),
  
   Microsoft Office
  
  , mobile devices running the
  
   Windows Phone
  

   OS
  
  ,
  
   Xbox 360
  
  and
  
   Xbox One
  
  game consoles, games and services including on-site Xbox diagnostics. The Answers Desk helps to answer questions related to Windows, Office, and other Microsoft products. The stores also offer class sessions as well as individual appointments.
 
  The first two Microsoft Stores opened within a week of the
  
   Windows 7
  
  launch, in
  
   Scottsdale, Arizona
  
  and
  
   Mission Viejo, California
  
  .
  

    [3]
   

  Additional stores have since opened in California, Colorado, Georgia, Illinois, Minnesota, Missouri, Texas and Washington. At the 2011
  
   Professional Developers Conference
  
  , Microsoft announced that they intend to open 75 new stores in the next three years.
  

    [4]
   


  The first store outside the U.S. (and the first of four stores in Canada) opened in
  
   Toronto
  
  on November 16, 2012
  

    [5]
   

  while the first store outside the North America (and first store in
  
   Asia-Pacific
  
  and second flagship store
  

    [6]
   

  ) opened in
  
   Sydney
  
  ,
  
   Australia
  
  on November 12, 2015
  

    [7]
   




  Microsoft's first experience with a retail store was located in the
  
   Metreon
  
  in
  
   San Francisco
  
  . It was owned and operated by Sony Retail Entertainment,
  

    [8]
   

  and ran from 1999
  

    [9]
   

  to 2001.
  

    [10]
   


  In 2009, Microsoft built a "Retail Experience Center" in their Redmond, WA headquarters
  

    [11]
   

  and announced plans to build its own retail stores.
  

    [12]
   

  On October 22, 2009, the same day as the Windows 7 launch, Microsoft opened a retail store in Scottsdale, Arizona. A week later, another opened in Mission Viejo, California. Five additional stores were opened in 2010. A ninth store opened in Atlanta in May 2011, with two more openings planned in Houston and Los Angeles by the end of June.
 
  The Microsoft Store is similar to the popular
  
   Apple Store
  
  concept, which has been largely successful.
  

    [13]
   

  The concept aims to give a greater level of customer satisfaction by not only having sales staff but also employing "Technical Advisers" (similar to Apple's "Geniuses") to assist customers with technical questions and issues. In addition "Specialists" (or trainers) are employed to show customers how to get the most out of their software.
  
   Xbox One
  
  consoles are also available to entertain patrons.
 
  Microsoft Store Online is the
  
   online store
  
  of Microsoft and is the successor of
  
   Windows Marketplace
  
  , which was also owned and operated by the company. It sells Microsoft software and hardware, as well as Microsoft Signature PCs and select third-party software and
  
   hobbyist
  
  products. (Microsoft Signature PCs, which are made by various
  
   manufacturers
  
  , including Microsoft with its
  
   Surface
  
  line, are
  
   desktops
  
  ,
  
   laptops
  
  , and
  
   tablets
  
  that run
  
   Windows
  
  without demos,
  
   trialware
  
  , or other
  
   manufacturer-installed programs
  
  ; they are equivalent to Google's
  
   Nexus
  
  and
  
   Google Play edition
  
  devices.) Besides the online storefront, items from the store can be ordered by phone.
 
  The website is in 228 markets worldwide, including Australia, Canada, the European Union, France, Germany, India, Italy, Japan, South Korea, the Netherlands, Spain, United Kingdom, and United States. The stores in Europe are able to accept orders from, and ship to other European countries as well. The Microsoft Store offers immediate software download options of some Microsoft software products in most
  
   [
   


      which?
     


   ]
  
  regions.
 
  On February 12, 2012 it was reported that Microsoft's India online store was hacked, and usernames and passwords were stolen by a Chinese group called "Evil Shadow Team". The team has stolen login ID's and passwords of users who had used the website for shopping. It was revealed that passwords were not encrypted and were stored in plain text.
  

    [31]
   


  In May 2013, Microsoft began to launch
  
   mall kiosk
  
  locations known as
  
   Microsoft Specialty Stores
  
  , expanding upon the Surface-focused
  
   pop-up stores
  
  established during the launch of Windows 8. They have a smaller product offering, with a particular focus on Surface and Windows Phone product lines.
  

    [32]
   


  On June 13, 2013, Microsoft announced a partnership with the
  
   Best Buy
  
  chain to replace their existing PC departments with
  
   The Windows Store
  
  (unrelated to
  
   the software distribution platform
  
  ) at 600 locations in the United States and Canada by September 2013. The
  
   store-within-a-store
  
  showcases Windows devices and Microsoft hardware and software products (including the Surface, Office, and Xbox lines). Departments for other manufacturers (such as Apple,
  
   Samsung
  
  and
  
   Google
  
  ) remain separate from the Windows Store sections. Best Buy also pledged to add 1,200 Microsoft-trained sales associates to its stores, and to stock more accessories for Microsoft-related products, such as
  
   Windows Phone
  
  devices.
  

    [33]
   

