


   Windows Embedded Compact
  
  ,
  

    [6]
   

  formerly
  
   Windows Embedded CE
  
  and
  
   Windows CE
  
  , is an
  
   operating system
  
  subfamily developed by
  
   Microsoft
  
  as part of its
  
   Windows Embedded
  
  family of products. Unlike
  
   Windows Embedded Standard
  
  , which is based on
  
   Windows NT
  
  , Windows Embedded Compact uses a different
  
   hybrid kernel
  
  .
  

    [7]
   

  Microsoft licenses Windows CE to
  
   original equipment manufacturers
  
  (OEMs), who can modify and create their own user interfaces and experiences, with Windows CE providing the technical foundation to do so.
 
  The current version of Windows Embedded Compact supports
  
   x86
  
  and
  
   ARM
  
  processors with
  
   board support package
  
  (BSP) directly.
  

    [8]
   

  The
  
   MIPS
  
  and
  
   SHx
  
  architectures had support prior to version 7.0.
 


  Windows CE is optimized for devices that have minimal memory; a Windows CE kernel may run with one megabyte of
  
   memory
  
  .
  

    [9]
   

  Devices are often configured without
  
   disk storage
  
  , and may be configured as a "closed" system that does not allow for end-user extension (for instance, it can be burned into
  
   ROM
  
  ). Windows CE conforms to the definition of a
  
   real-time operating system
  
  , with a deterministic interrupt latency. From Version 3 and onward, the system supports 256 priority levels
  

    [10]
   

  and uses
  
   priority inheritance
  
  for dealing with
  
   priority inversion
  
  . The fundamental unit of execution is the
  
   thread
  
  . This helps to simplify the interface and improve execution time.
 
  The first version –  known during development under the
  
   code name
  
  "Pegasus" –  featured a Windows-like
  
   GUI
  
  and a number of Microsoft's popular apps, all trimmed down for smaller storage, memory, and speed of the palmtops of the day. Since then, Windows CE has evolved into a component-based, embedded, real-time operating system. It is no longer targeted solely at hand-held computers.
  

    [11]
   

  Many platforms have been based on the core Windows CE operating system, including Microsoft's
  
   AutoPC
  
  ,
  
   Pocket PC 2000
  
  ,
  
   Pocket PC 2002
  
  ,
  
   Windows Mobile 2003
  
  ,
  
   Windows Mobile 2003 SE
  
  ,
  
   Windows Mobile 5
  
  ,
  
   Windows Mobile 6
  
  ,
  
   Smartphone 2002
  
  ,
  
   Smartphone 2003
  
  ,
  
   Portable Media Center
  
  ,
  
   Zune
  
  ,
  
   Windows Phone
  
  and many industrial devices and embedded systems. Windows CE even powered select games for the
  
   Dreamcast
  
  , was the operating system of the
  
   Gizmondo
  
  handheld, and can partially run on modified
  
   Xbox
  
  game consoles.
 
  A distinctive feature of Windows CE compared to other Microsoft operating systems is that large parts of it are offered in source code form. First, source code was offered to several vendors, so they could adjust it to their hardware. Then products like Platform Builder (an integrated environment for Windows CE OS image creation and integration, or customized operating system designs based on CE) offered several components in source code form to the general public. However, a number of core components that do not need adaptation to specific hardware environments (other than the CPU family) are still distributed in binary only form.
 
  Windows Embedded Compact was formerly known as Windows CE. According to Microsoft, "CE" is not an explicit acronym for anything, although it implies a number of notions that Windows developers had in mind, such as "compact", "connectable", "compatible", "companion" and "efficient".
  

    [12]
   



    [13]
   

  The name changed once in 2006, with the release of
  
   Windows Embedded CE 6.0
  
  , and again in 2011, with the release of
  
   Windows Embedded Compact 7
  
  .
 
  Windows CE was originally announced by Microsoft at the
  
   COMDEX
  
  expo in 1996 and was demonstrated on stage by
  
   Bill Gates
  
  and John McGill. Microsoft had been testing Pegasus in early 1995 and released a strict reference platform to several hardware partners. The devices had to have the following minimum hardware specifications:
 
  Devices of the time mainly had 480x240 pixel displays with the exception of the Hewlett Packard 'Palmtop PC' which had a 640x240 display. Each window took over the full display. Navigation was done by tapping or double tapping on an item. A contextual menu was also available by the user pressing the ALT key and tapping on the screen. Windows CE 1.0 did not include a cascading Start menu unlike Windows 95 and Windows NT 4.0 did. Microsoft released the Windows CE 1.0 Power Toys that included a cascading menu icon that appeared in the system tray. Also bundled were several other utilities, most notable were a sound applet for the system tray, enabling the user to quickly mute or unmute their device or adjust the volume and a 'pocket' version of Paint.
 
  The release of Windows CE 2.0 was well received. Microsoft learned its lessons from consumer feedback of Windows CE 1.0 and made many improvements to the operating system. The Start menu was a cascading menu, identical to those found on Windows 95 and Windows NT 4.0. Color screens were also supported and manufacturers raced to release the first color H/PC. The first to market however, was Hewlett Packard with the HP 620LX. Windows CE 2.0 also supported a broader range of CPU architectures. Programs could be also installed directly in the OS by double clicking on CAB files. Due to the nature of the ROMs that contained the operating system, users were not able to flash their devices with the newer operating system. Instead manufacturers released upgrade ROMs that users had to physically install in their devices, after removing the previous version. This would usually wipe the data on the device and present the user with the setup wizard upon first boot.
 

   Microsoft Visual Studio
  
  2012, 2013, and 2015 support apps and
  
   Platform Builder
  
  development for Windows Embedded Compact 2013.
  

    [14]
   


  Microsoft Visual Studio 2008 and earlier support projects for older releases of Windows CE/Windows Mobile, producing executable programs and platform images either as an emulator or attached by cable to an actual mobile device. A mobile device is not necessary to develop a CE program. The
  
   .NET Compact Framework
  
  supports a subset of the
  
   .NET Framework
  
  with projects in
  
   C#
  
  , and
  
   Visual Basic .NET
  
  , but not
  
   Managed C++
  
  . "Managed" apps employing the .NET Compact Framework also require devices with significantly larger memories (8
  
   MB
  
  or more) while unmanaged apps can still run successfully on smaller devices. In Visual Studio 2010, the Windows Phone Developer Tools are used as an extension, allowing Windows Phone 7 apps to be designed and tested within Visual Studio.
 

   Free Pascal
  
  introduced the Windows CE port in Version 2.2.0, targeting ARM and x86 architectures. Later, the Windows CE header files were translated for use with
  
   Lazarus
  
  , a
  
   rapid application development
  
  (RAD) software package based on Free Pascal. Windows CE apps are designed and coded in the Lazarus
  
   integrated development environment
  
  (IDE) and compiled with an appropriate
  
   cross compiler
  
  .
  

    [15]
   


  This
  
   programming tool
  
  is used for building the platform (
  
   BSP
  
  +
  
   Kernel
  
  ),
  
   device drivers
  
  (shared source or custom made) and also the apps. This is a one step environment to get the system up and running. One can also use Platform Builder to export an
  
   SDK
  
  (software development kit) for the target
  
   microprocessor
  
  (
  
   SuperH
  
  , x86, MIPS, ARM etc.) to be used with another associated tool set named below.
 
  The
  
   Embedded
  

   Visual C++
  
  (eVC) –  a
  
   tool
  
  for development of embedded apps for Windows CE. It can be used standalone using the
  
   SDK
  
  exported from Platform Builder or using the Platform Builder's Platform Manager connectivity setup.
 

   CodeGear
  

   Delphi Prism
  
  –  runs in Visual Studio, also supports the .NET Compact Framework and thus can be used to develop
  
   mobile apps
  
  . It employs the
  
   Oxygene
  
  compiler created by
  
   RemObjects Software
  
  , which targets .NET, the .NET Compact Framework, and
  
   Mono
  
  . Its command-line compiler is available free of charge.
 

   Basic4ppc
  
  –  a
  
   programming language
  
  similar to
  
   Visual Basic
  
  –  targets the
  
   .NET Compact Framework
  
  and supports Windows CE and Windows Mobile devices.
 

   GLBasic
  
  –  a very easy to learn and use BASIC dialect that compiles for many platforms, including Windows CE and Windows Mobile. It can be extended by writing inline C/C++ code.
 

   LabVIEW
  
  –  a graphical programming language, supporting many platforms, including Windows CE.
 

   AutoHotkey
  
  –  a port of the open source macro-creation and automation software utility available for Windows CE. It allows the construction of macros and simple
  
   GUI
  
  apps developed by systems analyst Jonathan Maxian Timkang.
  

    [16]
   


  Often Windows CE,
  
   Windows Mobile
  
  , and
  
   Pocket PC
  
  are used interchangeably, in part due to their common origin. This practice is not entirely accurate. Windows CE is a modular/componentized operating system that serves as the foundation of several classes of devices. Some of these modules provide subsets of other components' features (e.g. varying levels of windowing support;
  
   DCOM
  
  vs
  
   COM
  
  ), others which are separate (
  
   Bitmap
  
  or
  
   TrueType
  
  font support), and others which add additional features to another component. One can buy a kit (the Platform Builder) which contains all these components and the tools with which to develop a custom platform. Apps such as
  
   Excel Mobile
  
  (formerly Pocket Excel) are not part of this kit. The older Handheld PC version of Pocket Word and several other older apps are included as samples, however.
 
  Windows Mobile is best described as a subset of platforms based on a Windows CE underpinning. Currently, Pocket PC (now called Windows Mobile Classic), SmartPhone (Windows Mobile Standard), and Pocket PC Phone Edition (Windows Mobile Professional) are the three main platforms under the Windows Mobile umbrella. Each platform uses different components of Windows CE, plus supplemental features and apps suited for their respective devices.
 
  Pocket PC and Windows Mobile are Microsoft-defined custom platforms for general PDA use, consisting of a Microsoft-defined set of minimum profiles (Professional Edition, Premium Edition) of software and hardware that is supported. The rules for manufacturing a Pocket PC device are stricter than those for producing a custom Windows CE-based platform. The defining characteristics of the Pocket PC are the
  
   touchscreen
  
  as the primary
  
   human interface device
  
  and its extremely portable size.
 
  CE v3.0 is the basis for Pocket PC 2002. A successor to CE v3.0 is CE.net.
  

    [17]
   

  "PocketPC [is] a separate layer of code on top of the core Windows CE OS... Pocket PC is based on Windows CE, but it's a different offering." And licensees of Pocket PC are forbidden to modify the WinCE part.
  

    [18]
   


  The SmartPhone platform is a feature-rich OS and interface for cellular phone handsets. SmartPhone offers productivity features to business users, such as email, and multimedia abilities for consumers. The SmartPhone interface relies heavily on joystick navigation and PhonePad input. Devices running SmartPhone do not include a touchscreen interface. SmartPhone devices generally resemble other cellular handset form factors, whereas most Phone Edition devices use a PDA form factor with a larger display.
 
     1.01 version (1.0a) –  added
     
      Japanese
     
     language support.
    
     2.11 version (Palm-Size PC 1.1) –  changed screen resolution to
     
      QVGA
     
     , added
     
      handwriting recognition
     
     . 2.11 version (Palm-Size PC 1.2) –  based on Windows CE H/PC 2.11 kernel, removed
     
      Pocket Office
     
     .
    
     HandeldPC 2.11 version (HandheldPC Professional) –  added small versions of
     
      Microsoft Access
     
     , improved
     
      MS Office
     
     documents formats support.
    