

  A
  
   smartwatch
  
  is a
  
   computerized
  
  wristwatch with functionality that goes beyond
  
   timekeeping
  
  . While early models can perform basic tasks, such as
  
   calculations
  
  ,
  
   translations
  
  , and
  
   game-playing
  
  , 2010s smartwatches are effectively
  
   wearable computers
  
  . Many run
  
   mobile apps
  
  , using a
  
   mobile operating system
  
  . Some smartwatches function as
  
   portable media players
  
  , with
  
   FM radio
  
  and playback of digital audio and video files via a
  
   Bluetooth
  
  or USB
  
   headset
  
  . Some models, also called 'watch phones', feature full
  
   mobile phone
  
  capability, and can make or answer phone calls
  

    [1]
   



    [2]
   



    [3]
   

  or
  
   text messages
  
  .
 
  While internal hardware varies, most have an
  
   electronic visual display
  
  , either backlit
  
   LCD
  
  or
  
   OLED
  
  .
  

    [4]
   

  Some use
  
   transflective
  
  or
  
   electronic paper
  
  , to consume less power. Most have a
  
   rechargeable battery
  
  and many have a
  
   touchscreen
  
  .
  
   Peripheral devices
  
  may include
  
   digital cameras
  
  ,
  
   thermometers
  
  ,
  
   accelerometers
  
  ,
  
   altimeters
  
  ,
  
   barometers
  
  ,
  
   compasses
  
  ,
  
   GPS receivers
  
  , tiny
  
   speakers
  
  , and
  
   SD card
  
  (that are recognized as a
  
   storage device
  
  by a
  
   computer
  
  ).
 
  Software may include
  
   digital maps
  
  ,
  
   schedulers
  
  and
  
   personal organizers
  
  ,
  
   calculators
  
  , and various kinds of
  
   watch faces
  
  . The watch may communicate with external devices such as sensors,
  
   wireless headsets
  
  , or a
  
   heads-up display
  
  . Like other
  
   computers
  
  , a smartwatch may collect information from internal or external sensors and it may control, or retrieve data from, other instruments or computers. It may support wireless technologies like
  
   Bluetooth
  
  ,
  
   Wi-Fi
  
  , and
  
   GPS
  
  . For many purposes, a "wristwatch computer" serves as a front end for a remote system such as a
  
   smartphone
  
  , communicating with the smartphone using various wireless technologies. Smartwatches are advancing, especially their design, battery capacity, and health related applications.
  

    [5]
   




  Many smartwatch models manufactured in the 2010s are completely functional as standalone products. Some serve as sport watches, the
  
   GPS tracking unit
  
  being used to record historical data. For example, after a workout, data can be uploaded onto a computer or online to create a log of activities for analysis or sharing. Some watches can serve as full
  
   GPS watches
  
  , displaying maps and current coordinates, and recording tracks. Users can "mark" their current location and then edit the entry's name and coordinates, which enables navigation to those new coordinates. As companies add competitive products into the market, media space is becoming a desired commodity on smart watches. With
  
   Apple
  
  ,
  
   Sony
  
  ,
  
   Samsung
  
  , and
  
   Motorola
  
  introducing their smart watch models, 15% of tech consumers
  

    [6]
   

  use
  
   wearable technologies
  
  . This is a dense market
  
   [
   


      clarification needed
     


   ]
  
  of tech consumers who possess buying power, which has attracted many advertisers. It is expected for mobile advertising on wearable devices to increase heavily by 2017 as
  
   advanced hypertargeting
  
  modules are introduced to the devices. In order for an advertisement to be effective on a smart watch, companies have stated that the ad must be able to create experiences native to the smart watch itself.
  

    [7]
   


  "Sport watch" functionality often includes
  
   activity tracker
  
  features (also known as "fitness tracker") as seen in
  
   GPS watches
  
  made for training, diving, and outdoor sports. Functions may include training programs (such as intervals), lap times, speed display,
  
   GPS tracking unit
  
  , Route tracking,
  
   dive computer
  
  ,
  
   heart rate monitor
  
  compatibility,
  
   Cadence
  
  sensor compatibility, and compatibility with sport transitions (as in
  
   triathlons
  
  ). Other watches can cooperate with an app in a
  
   smartphone
  
  to carry out their functions. They may be little more than timepieces unless they are paired, usually by
  
   Bluetooth
  
  , with a mobile phone. Some of these only work with a phone that runs the same
  
   mobile operating system
  
  ; others use a unique watch OS, or otherwise are able to work with most smartphones. Paired, the watch may function as a remote to the phone. This allows the watch to display data such as calls, SMS messages, emails, and calendar invites, and any data that may be made available by relevant
  
   phone apps
  
  . Some fitness tracker watches give users reports on the number of kilometers they walked, hours of sleep, and so on.
 
  The first
  
   digital watch
  
  , which debuted in 1972, was the
  
   Pulsar
  
  manufactured by
  
   Hamilton Watch Company
  
  . "Pulsar" became a brand name which would later be acquired by
  
   Seiko
  
  in 1978. In 1982, a
  
   Pulsar
  
  watch (NL C01) was released which could store 24 digits, making it most likely the first watch with user-programmable memory, or "memorybank" watch.
  

    [8]
   

  With the introduction of personal computers in the 1980s,
  
   Seiko
  
  began to develop watches with computing ability. The Data 2000 watch (1983) came with an external keyboard for data-entry. Data was synced from the keyboard to the watch via electro-magnetic coupling (wireless docking). The name comes from its ability to store 2000 characters. The D409 was the first
  
   Seiko
  
  model with on-board data entry (via a miniature keyboard) and featured a
  
   dot matrix
  
  display.
  

    [9]
   

  Its memory was tiny, at only 112 digits.
  

    [8]
   

  It was released in 1984, in gold, silver and black.
  

    [10]
   

  These models were followed by many others by Seiko during the 1980s, most notably the "RC Series": During the 1980s,
  
   Casio
  
  began to market a successful line of "computer watches", in addition to its
  
   calculator watches
  
  . Most notable was the
  
   Casio data bank
  
  series. Novelty "game watches", such as the
  
   Nelsonic game watches
  
  , were also produced by Casio and other companies.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  The RC-1000 Wrist Terminal was the first
  
   Seiko
  
  model to interface with a computer, and was released in 1984.
  

    [9]
   

  It was developed by
  
   Seiko Epson
  
  and was powered by a
  
   computer on a chip
  
  .
  

    [11]
   

  It was compatible with most of the popular PCs of that time, including
  
   Apple
  
  II,II+ and IIe, the
  
   Commodore
  
  64,
  
   IBM
  
  PC,
  
   NEC
  
  8201,
  
   Tandy
  
  Color Computer, Model 1000, 1200, 2000 and TRS-80 Model I, III, 4 and 4p. The RC-20 Wrist Computer was released in 1985, under the joint brand name "Seiko Epson".
  

    [12]
   



    [13]
   

  It had a SMC84C00 8-bit Z-80
  
   microprocessor
  
  ; 8
  
   KB
  
  of
  
   ROM
  
  and 2 KB of
  
   RAM
  
  . It had applications for scheduling, memos, and world time and a four-function calculator app. The dot-matrix LCD displayed 42×32 pixels, and more importantly, was touch-sensitive. Like the RC-1000, it could be connected to a personal computer, in this case through a proprietary cable. It was also notable in that it could be programmed, although its small display and limited storage severely limited application development.
  

    [9]
   

  The RC-4000 PC Data graph also released in 1985, was dubbed the "world's smallest computer terminal".
  

    [9]
   

  It had 2 KB of storage. The RC-4500 (1985), also known as the Wrist Mac, had the same features as the RC-4000, but came in a variety of bright, flashy colors.
 
  The
  
   Timex Datalink
  
  , a so-called wristwatch, product line was introduced in 1994. The early Timex Datalink Smartwatches realized a wireless data transfer mode to communicate with a PC. Appointments and contacts created with
  
   Microsoft Schedule+
  
  , the predecessor of MS Outlook, could be easily transmitted to the watch via a screen blinking light protocol.
 
  In 1998,
  
   Steve Mann
  
  invented, designed, and built the world's first Linux wristwatch,
  

    [14]
   

  which he presented at IEEE ISSCC2000 on February 7, 2000, where he was named "the father of wearable computing".
  

    [15]
   

  See also Linux Journal,
  

    [16]
   

  where Mann's Linux wristwatch appeared on the cover and was the feature article of LJ Issue 75. Seiko launched the
  
   Ruputer
  
  in Japan - a wristwatch computer with a 3.6 MHz processor. It was not very successful since instead of a touchscreen it used a joystick alike device to input characters, much like high scores in arcade games and the small screen with a resolution at 102x64 in 4 greyscales made it hard to read large amounts of text. Outside of Japan this watch was distributed as the Matsucom onHand PC. Despite the rather low demand the Matsucom onHand PC was distributed until 2006, making it a smartwatch with a rather long life cycle. Ruputer and onHand PC applications are 100% compatible. This watch is sometimes considered the first smartwatch since it was the first watch to offer graphics display (albeit monochrome) and many 3rd party applications (mostly homebrew).
 
  In 1999,
  
   Samsung
  
  launched the world's first watch phone, the SPH-WP10. It had a protruding antenna, a monochrome LCD screen, and a 90-minutes of talk time with an integrated speaker and microphone.
  

    [17]
   


  In June 2000,
  
   IBM
  
  displayed a prototype for a wristwatch that ran
  
   Linux
  
  . The original version had only 6 hours of battery life, which was later extended to 12.
  

    [19]
   

  It featured 8
  
   MB
  
  of memory and ran Linux 2.2.
  

    [20]
   

  The device was later upgraded with an accelerometer, vibrating mechanism, and fingerprint sensor. IBM began to collaborate with
  
   Citizen Watch Co.
  
  to create the "WatchPad". The WatchPad 1.5 features a 320 × 240
  
   QVGA
  
  monochrome touch sensitive display and runs Linux 2.4.
  

    [21]
   



    [22]
   

  It also features calendar software,
  
   Bluetooth
  
  , 8 MB of RAM and 16 MB of flash memory.
  

    [23]
   



    [24]
   

  Citizen was hoping to market the watch to students and businessmen, with a retail price of around $399.
  

    [24]
   

  Epson Seiko introduced their Chrono-bit wristwatch in September, 2000. The Chrono-bit watches feature a rotating bezel for data input, synchronize PIM data via a serial cable, and can load custom watch faces.
  

    [25]
   


  In 2003, Fossil released the
  
   Wrist PDA
  
  , a watch which ran the
  
   Palm OS
  
  and contained 8 MB of RAM and 4 MB of flash memory.
  

    [26]
   



    [27]
   

  It contained a built in stylus to help use the tiny monochrome display, which had a resolution of 160×160 pixels. Although many reviewers declared the watch revolutionary, it was criticized for its weight (108 grams) and was ultimately discontinued in 2005.
  

    [28]
   


  Microsoft releases the SPOT smartwatch. SPOT stands for
  
   Smart Personal Objects Technology
  
  , an initiative by Microsoft to personalize household electronics and other everyday gadgets. The watch was supposed to offer information at a glance where other devices would have required more immersion and interaction. The SPOT Watch had a monochrome 90×126 pixel screen.
  

    [29]
   


  Sony Ericsson teamed up with Fossils, and released the first watch, MBW-100, that connected to Bluetooth. This watch notified the user when receiving calls and text messages. Though the watch was not popular as it would only connect and work with Sony Ericsson cell phones.
  

    [30]
   


  In 2009,
  
   Samsung
  
  launched the
  
   S9110 Watch Phone
  
  which featured a 1.76-inch (45 mm) color LCD display and was 11.98 millimetres (0.472 in) thin.
  

    [17]
   


  Sony Ericsson launches the
  
   Sony Ericsson LiveView
  
  , a wearable watch device which is basically an external Bluetooth display for an Android Smartphone. Vyzin Electronics private Limited unveiled their first medical alert smart watch for health with cellular, GPS and medicine reminder and SOS for help during emergency.
  

    [31]
   


  Vyzin Electronics Private Limited launched a ZigBee enabled smart watch
  

    [32]
   

  with cellular connectivity for remote health monitoring called VESAG.
  

    [33]
   


  In 2013, the claim to first ever smartwatch to capture the full capability of a smartphone was laid by startup Omate with the
  
   TrueSmart
  
  . The TrueSmart originated from a Kickstarter campaign which raised over 1 million dollars, making it the 5th most successful Kickstarter to date. The TrueSmart made its public debut in early 2014.
  

    [34]
   

  Consumer device analyst Avi Greengart, from research firm Current Analysis, suggested that 2013 may be the "year of the smartwatch", as "the components have gotten small enough and cheap enough" and many consumers own smartphones that are compatible with a wearable device.
  
   Wearable technology
  
  , such as
  
   Google Glass
  
  , may evolve into a business worth US$6 billion annually and a July 2013 media report, revealed that the majority of major consumer electronics manufacturers were undertaking work on a smartwatch device at the time of publication. The retail price of a smartwatch could be over US$300, plus data charges, while the minimum cost of smartphone-linked devices may be US$100.
  

    [35]
   



    [36]
   


  As of July 2013, the list of companies that were engaged in smartwatch development activities consists of Acer, Apple, BlackBerry, Foxconn/Hon Hai, Google, LG, Microsoft, Qualcomm, Samsung, Sony, VESAG and Toshiba. Some notable omissions from this list include HP, HTC, Lenovo, and Nokia.
  

    [36]
   

  Science and technology journalist Christopher Mims identified the following points in relation to the future of smartwatches:
 
  Acer's S.T. Liew stated in an interview with British gadget website
  
   Pocket-Lint
  
  , "... I think every consumer company should be looking at wearable. Wearable isn’t new … it just hasn’t exploded in the way that it should. But the opportunity’s for billions of dollars’ worth of industry."
  

    [38]
   


  As of 4 September 2013, three new smartwatches have been launched: the
  
   Samsung Galaxy Gear
  
  ,
  
   Sony
  
  SmartWatch 2,
  

    [39]
   

  and the
  
   Qualcomm Toq
  
  .
  

    [40]
   

  PHTL, a company based in
  
   Dallas, Texas
  
  , completed is crowd-funding process on Kickstarter for its HOT Watch smartwatch in September 2013. This device enables users to leave their handsets in their pockets, since it has a speaker for phone calls in both quiet and noisy environments.
  

    [41]
   

  In a September 2013 interview,
  
   Pebble
  
  founder Eric Migicovsky stated that his company was not interested in any acquisition offers,
  

    [42]
   

  but revealed in a November 2013 interview, that his company has sold 190,000 smartwatches, the majority of which were sold after its Kickstarter campaign closed.
  

    [37]
   



   Motorola Mobility
  
  CEO
  
   Dennis Woodside
  
  confirmed that his company is working on a smartwatch during a December 2013 interview.
  

    [43]
   

  Woodside showed an awareness of the difficulties that other companies have experienced with wrist-wearable technologies and explained:
 
   There's clearly gonna be something that changes on your wrist, how it works and what exactly it is is something our teams are working on hard. Whatever it is, it has to compete with what works now ... We can't have something fragile, we can't have something that needs to be charged everyday. You're going to have to have some functionality that's just killer otherwise why spend the money on yet another product.
   
    [
    


       not in citation given
      


    ]
   


     [37]
    


  At the 2014
  
   Consumer Electronics Show
  
  , a large number of new smartwatches were released from various companies such as
  
   Razer Inc
  
  ,
  

    [44]
   


   Archos
  
  ,
  

    [45]
   

  and several other companies, as well as a few startups. Some have begun to call the 2014 CES, a "wrist revolution"
  

    [46]
   

  because of the amount of smartwatches release and the huge amount of publicity they began to receive at the start of 2014. At
  
   Google I/O
  
  on 25 June 2014, the
  
   Android Wear
  
  platform was introduced and the
  
   LG G Watch
  
  and
  
   Samsung Gear Live
  
  were released. The Wear-based
  
   Moto 360
  
  was announced by
  
   Motorola
  
  in 2014.
  

    [47]
   

  At the end of July, Swatch's CEO Nick Hayek announced that they will launch a Swatch Touch with smartwatch technologies in 2015.
  

    [48]
   

  In the UK, the
  
   Wearable Technology Show
  
  had its début in London, and was host to several smartwatch companies exhibiting their newest models.
 
  The launch of Samsung's Gear S smartwatch was covered by the media in late August 2014. The model features a curved Super
  
   AMOLED
  
  display and a built-in 3G modem, with technology writer Darrell Etherington stating on the
  
   TechCrunch
  
  website, "we’re finally starting to see displays that wrap around the contours of the wrist, rather than sticking out as a traditional flat surface." The corporation will commence selling the Gear S smartwatch in October 2014, alongside the Gear Circle headset accessory.
  

    [49]
   

  At IFA 2014
  
   Sony Mobile
  
  announced the third generation of its smartwatch series, the Sony Smartwatch 3 powered by Android Wear.
  

    [50]
   

  Also was announced the Fashion Entertainments'
  
   e-paper
  
  watch.
  

    [51]
   


  On 9 September 2014,
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  announced its first smartwatch called
  
   Apple Watch
  
  to be released in early 2015.
  

    [52]
   

  On 24 April 2015,
  
   Apple Watch
  
  began shipping across the world.
  

    [53]
   

  Apple’s first foray into wearable technology was met with considerable criticism during the pre-launch period, with many early technology reviews citing issues with battery life and hardware malfunctions. However, others praise Apple for creating a potentially fashionable device that can compete with "traditional watches",
  

    [54]
   

  not just the smartwatch industry in general. The watch only turns on when you activate the watch (either by lifting your wrist, touching the screen or pressing a button). On 29 October 2014,
  
   Microsoft
  
  announced the
  
   Microsoft Band
  
  , a smart fitness tracker and the company's first venture into wrist worn devices since SPOT (
  
   Smart Personal Objects Technology
  
  ) a decade earlier. The Microsoft Band was released at $199 the following day, on 30 October 2014.
  

    [55]
   


  In October 2015,
  
   Samsung
  
  unveiled the
  
   Samsung Gear S2
  
  . It features a rotating bezel for ease of use, and an IP68 rating for water resistance up to 1.5 meters deep in 30 minutes. The watch is compatible with industry-standard 20 mm straps.
 
  At the 2016
  
   Consumer Electronics Show
  
  ,
  
   Razer
  
  released the
  
   Nabu Watch
  
  , a
  
   dual-screen smartwatch
  
  : integrates an always-on illuminated
  
   backlit
  
  display, that takes care of some pretty standard features as date and time, and a second
  
   OLED
  
  screen, which is activated by raising your wrist, allows access to extra smart features.
  

    [56]
   

  Luxury watchmaker
  
   TAG Heuer
  
  released TAG Heuer Connected, a smartwatch powered by
  
   Android Wear
  
  .
  

    [57]
   


  On August 31, 2016, Samsung unveiled the Samsung Gear S3 smartwatch, with a higher specifications, there are at least two models, the Samsung Gear S3 Classic and the LTE version Samsung Gear S3 Frontier.
  

    [58]
   


  In China, since around 2015, phone wristwatches have become widely used by schoolchildren. They are advertised on television throughout the country as a safety device whereby the child can call in case of emergency. These watches are commonly colourful and made of plastic. They normally have no display unless a button is pushed. Apart from being a phone, they also tell time, and sometimes air temperature. They cost around $100 to $200 USD.
 


    Android Wear
   

  is a smartwatch operating system developed by
  
   Google Inc.
  



    Android OS
   

  is a smartwatch operating system that many watches use which means they can operate as a standalone phone. Examples are Finow Q1, X1, etc. These are not compatible with "Wear" and should not be confused. Advantages and disadvantages abound. For one thing many google apps for smartphones will work. For another, there may be issues with notifications.
 


    AsteroidOS
   

  is an open source firmware replacement for some Android Wear devices focused on user freedom, privacy, and community development.
 


    Sailfish OS
   

  is a Linux-based
  
   operating system
  
  scalable for various devices from
  
   Sailfish smartwatchs
  
  trough smartphones & tablets to
  
   laptops
  
  & desktops, including
  
   in-vehicle infotainment
  
  (IVI) devices, smart TVs, navigations, yachts equipment, house goods and other smart devices.
 


    WatchOS
   

  is a
  
   proprietary
  
  mobile operating system developed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  



    Tizen
   

  is a Linux-based
  
   operating system
  
  for devices, including smartphones,
  
   tablets
  
  ,
  
   in-vehicle infotainment
  
  (IVI) devices, smart TVs,
  
   laptops
  
  and other smart devices. Tizen is a project within the
  
   Linux Foundation
  
  and is governed by a Technical Steering Group (TSG) composed of Samsung and Intel among others. Samsung released the
  
   Samsung Gear 2
  
  , Gear 2 Neo, Samsung Gear S and the
  
   Samsung Gear S2
  
  running Tizen.
  

    [59]
   




    Ubuntu Touch
   

  is a mobile version of the
  
   Ubuntu operating system
  
  developed by
  
   Canonical UK Ltd
  
  and Ubuntu Community.
  

    [60]
   

  It is designed primarily for touchscreen mobile devices such as smartwatches, smartphones and tablet computers.
 


    The Rising Craze for the Smart Watches
   



