


   AmigaOS
  
  is a family of proprietary native
  
   operating systems
  
  of the
  
   Amiga
  
  and
  
   AmigaOne
  
  personal computers. It was developed first by
  
   Commodore International
  
  and introduced with the launch of the first Amiga, the
  
   Amiga 1000
  
  , in 1985. Early versions of AmigaOS required the Motorola
  
   68000 series
  
  of
  
   16-bit
  
  and
  
   32-bit
  
  microprocessors. Later versions were developed by
  
   Haage & Partner
  
  (AmigaOS 3.5 and 3.9) and then
  
   Hyperion Entertainment
  
  (AmigaOS 4.0-4.1). A
  
   PowerPC
  
  microprocessor is required for the most recent release,
  
   AmigaOS 4
  
  .
 
  AmigaOS is a single-user operating system based on a
  
   preemptive multitasking
  

   kernel
  
  , called
  
   Exec
  
  . It includes an abstraction of the Amiga's hardware, a disk operating system called AmigaDOS, a
  
   windowing system
  

   API
  
  called
  

    Intuition
   

  and a desktop
  
   file manager
  
  called
  

    Workbench
   

  .
 
  The Amiga intellectual property is fragmented between
  
   Amiga Inc.
  
  , Cloanto, and
  
   Hyperion Entertainment
  
  . The copyrights for works created up to 1993 are owned by Cloanto.
  

    [1]
   



    [2]
   

  In 2001, Amiga Inc. contracted AmigaOS 4 development to Hyperion Entertainment and, in 2009 they granted Hyperion an exclusive, perpetual, worldwide license to AmigaOS 3.1 in order to develop and market AmigaOS 4 and subsequent versions.
  

    [3]
   


  On December 29, 2015, the AmigaOS 3.1
  
   source code
  

   leaked
  
  to the web; this was confirmed by the rights holder,
  
   Hyperion Entertainment
  
  .
  

    [4]
   



    [5]
   




  AmigaOS is a single-user operating system based on a
  
   preemptive multitasking
  

   kernel
  
  , called
  
   Exec
  
  . AmigaOS provides an abstraction of the Amiga's hardware, a disk operating system called AmigaDOS, a
  
   windowing system
  

   API
  
  called
  

    Intuition
   

  and a desktop
  
   file manager
  
  called
  

    Workbench
   

  . A
  
   command-line interface
  
  (CLI), called AmigaShell, is also integrated into the system, though it also is entirely window-based. The CLI and Workbench components share the same privileges. Notably, AmigaOS lacks any built-in
  
   memory protection
  
  .
 
  AmigaOS is formed from two parts, namely, a firmware component called
  

    Kickstart
   

  and a software portion usually referred to as
  
   Workbench
  
  . Up until AmigaOS 3.1, matching versions of Kickstart and Workbench were typically released together. However, since AmigaOS 3.5, the first release after Commodore's demise, only the software component has been updated and the role of Kickstart has been diminished somewhat. Firmware updates may still be applied by
  
   patching
  
  at system boot.
 

   Kickstart
  
  is the
  
   bootstrap
  
  firmware, usually stored in
  
   ROM
  
  . Kickstart contains the code needed to boot standard Amiga hardware and many of the core components of AmigaOS. The function of Kickstart is comparable to the
  
   BIOS
  
  plus the main
  
   operating system
  
  kernel in
  
   IBM PC compatibles
  
  . However, Kickstart provides more functionality available at boot time than would typically be expected on PC, for example, the full windowing environment.
 
  Kickstart contains many core parts of the Amiga's operating system, such as
  

    Exec
   

  ,
  

    Intuition
   

  , the core of
  
   AmigaDOS
  
  and functionality to initialize
  
   Autoconfig
  
  -compliant expansion hardware. Later versions of the Kickstart contained drivers for
  
   IDE
  
  and
  
   SCSI
  
  controllers,
  
   PC card
  
  ports and other built-in hardware.
 
  Upon start-up or reset the Kickstart performs a number of diagnostic and system checks and then initializes the Amiga chipset and some core OS components. It will then examine connected boot devices and attempt to boot from the one with the highest boot priority. If no boot device is present a screen will be displayed asking the user to insert a boot disk, typically a floppy disk.
 
  At start-up Kickstart attempts to boot from a bootable device (typically, a floppy disk or hard disk drive). In the case of a floppy, the system reads the first two sectors of the disk (the
  
   bootblock
  
  ), and executes any boot instructions stored there. Normally this code passes control back to the OS (invoking AmigaDOS and the GUI) and using the disk as the system boot volume. Any such disk, regardless of the other contents of the disk, was referred to as a "Boot disk" or "bootable disk". A bootblock could be added to a blank disk by use of the
  
   install
  
  command. Some entertainment software contained custom bootblocks. This allowed an application, game or
  
   demo
  
  to take control of memory and resources, effectively disabling AmigaOS.
 
  The bootblock became an obvious target for
  
   virus
  
  writers. Some games or demos that used a custom bootblock would not work if infected with a bootblock virus, as the code of the virus replaced the original. The first such virus was the
  
   SCA virus
  
  .
  
   Anti-virus
  
  attempts included custom bootblocks. These amended bootblock advertised the presence of the virus checker while checking the system for tell-tale signs of memory-resident viruses and then passed control back to the system. Unfortunately these could not be used on disks that already relied on a custom bootblock, but did alert users to potential trouble. Several of them also replicated themselves across other disks, becoming little more than viruses in their own right.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

   The Macintosh should have had multitasking. I can't stress enough what a big contribution it makes to the elegant design of system software. The Amiga has an excellent multitasking system, and I think it will have twice the product life of the Macintosh because of it.
  
   — Adam Brooks Webber, the programmer responsible for porting
   
    TrueBASIC
   
   to the Amiga and Macintosh,
   
    Byte
   
   Sept. 1986
  

   Exec
  
  is the
  
   multi-tasking
  

   kernel
  
  of AmigaOS. Exec provides functionality for multi-tasking, memory allocation,
  
   interrupt
  
  handling and handling of
  
   dynamic shared libraries
  
  . It acts as a
  
   scheduler
  
  for tasks running on the system, providing pre-emptive multitasking with prioritized
  
   round-robin scheduling
  
  . Exec also provides access to other libraries and high-level
  
   inter-process communication
  
  via
  
   message passing
  
  . Other comparable microkernels have had performance problems because of the need to copy messages between address spaces. Since the Amiga has only one address space, Exec message passing is quite efficient.
  

    [6]
   



    [7]
   



   AmigaDOS
  
  provides the
  
   disk operating system
  
  portion of the AmigaOS. This includes
  
   file systems
  
  , file and directory manipulation, the
  
   command-line interface
  
  , file redirection, console windows, and so on. Its interfaces offer facilities such as
  
   command redirection
  
  ,
  
   piping
  
  ,
  
   scripting
  
  with
  
   structured programming
  
  primitives, and a system of global and local
  
   variables
  
  .
 
  In AmigaOS 1.x, the AmigaDOS portion was based on
  
   TRIPOS
  
  , which is written in
  
   BCPL
  
  . Interfacing with it from other languages proved a difficult and error-prone task, and the port of TRIPOS was not very efficient.
 
  From AmigaOS 2.x onwards, AmigaDOS was rewritten in
  
   C
  
  and
  
   Assembler
  
  , retaining full 1.x BCPL program compatibility, and it incorporated parts of the third-party
  
   AmigaDOS Resource Project
  
  ,
  

    [8]
   

  which had already written replacements for many of the BCPL utilities and interfaces.
 
  ARP also provided one of the first standardized
  
   file requesters
  
  for the Amiga, and introduced the use of more friendly UNIX-style wildcard (
  
   globbing
  
  ) functions in command-line parameters. Other innovations were an improvement in the range of date formats accepted by commands and the facility to make a command resident, so that it only needs to be loaded into memory once and remains in memory to reduce the cost of loading in subsequent uses.
 
  In
  
   AmigaOS 4.0
  
  , the DOS abandoned the BCPL legacy completely and, starting from
  
   AmigaOS 4.1
  
  , it has been rewritten with full
  
   64-bit
  
  support.
 

   File extensions
  
  are often used in AmigaOS, but they are not mandatory and they are not handled specially by the DOS, being instead just a conventional part of the file names. Executable programs are recognized using a
  
   magic number
  
  .
 
  The native Amiga
  
   windowing system
  
  is called
  
   Intuition
  
  , which handles input from the keyboard and mouse and rendering of screens, windows and basic widgets. However, until AmigaOS 2.0 there was no standardized
  
   look and feel
  
  , and often application developers had to write their own non-standard widgets (both buttons and menus), with Intuition providing minimal support.
 
  An unusual feature of AmigaOS is the use of multiple screens. These screens are conceptually similar to
  
   X Window System
  
  virtual desktops or workspaces, but can be generated dynamically by application programs. Each screen may have a different resolution and color depth. AmigaOS 2.0 also added support for
  
   public screens
  
  . Instead of the Workbench screen being the only shareable screen, applications could create their own named screens to share with other applications. A public-screen-aware application could request a specific public screen by its name with the
  
   LockPubScreen()
  
  system call and, if such a screen was found, the resulting handle could be passed to the
  
   OpenWindowTagList()
  
  system call, and the application would open its window on the specified public screen. This allowed developers to even write applications that allowed the user to specify in which screen they would open their windows.
  

    [9]
   


  A gadget in the top-right corner of the screen allows screens to be cycled. Screens can be overlaid by dragging each up or down by their title bars. As the OS stores all screens in memory simultaneously, redrawing is instantaneous. On early Amigas this functionality is provided by the custom chipset, but since AmigaOS4 a new hardware-assisted technique has been adopted and the screens are draggable in any direction. It is possible to drag and drop icons between screens.
 
  Each screen has its own
  
   RastPort
  
  handle, just as windows do. This allows applications to draw graphics directly onto the screen instead of being limited to their own window.
 
  Intuition provided some basic
  
   widgets
  
  . With AmigaOS 2.0 Intuition was enhanced with GadTools and the
  
   BOOPSI
  
  object-oriented widget system (AmigaOS 2.0 an later), which both provided standard widget sets, and the
  
   Amiga User Interface Style Guide
  
  , which explained how applications should be laid out for consistency. Later AmigaOS provided an enhanced widget set through
  
   ReAction
  
  (AmigaOS 3.5 and later).
  
   Stefan Stuntz
  
  created a popular third-party widget library (based on
  
   BOOPSI
  
  ) called
  
   Magic User Interface
  
  (MUI) which became the official widget toolkit in
  
   MorphOS
  
  , while
  
   AROS
  
  implements an MUI clone called
  
   Zune
  
  .
 

   Workbench
  
  is the native graphical
  
   file manager
  
  and desktop environment of AmigaOS. Though the term Workbench was originally used to refer to the entire operating system, with the release of AmigaOS 3.1 the operating system was renamed AmigaOS and subsequently Workbench refers to the desktop manager only. As the name suggests, the
  
   metaphor
  
  of a
  
   workbench
  
  is used, rather than that of a desktop; directories are depicted as
  
   drawers
  
  , executable files are
  
   tools
  
  , data files are
  
   projects
  
  and GUI widgets are
  
   gadgets
  
  . In many other aspects the interface resembles
  
   Mac OS
  
  , with the main desktop showing icons of inserted disks and hard drive partitions, and a single menu bar at the top of every screen. Unlike the Macintosh mouse available at the time, the standard Amiga mouse has two buttons – the right mouse button operates the pull-down menus, with a "release to select" mechanism. Underlying Workbench is the
  

    Intuition
   

  windowing system, which handles screens, windows, gadgets and input from the keyboard and mouse. The Workbench environment is not actually required to launch applications and, in practice, many software titles, particularly games, boot directly from Kickstart, using a custom
  

    bootblock
   

  , in order to retain full access to memory and resources.
 
  Until the release of version 3, AmigaOS only natively supported the
  
   native Amiga graphics chipset
  
  , via
  
   graphics.library
  
  , which provides an API for
  
   geometric primitives
  
  ,
  
   raster graphic
  
  operations and handling of sprites. As this API could be bypassed, some developers chose to avoid OS functionality for rendering and directly program the underlying hardware for gains in efficiency.
 
  Third-party graphics cards were initially supported via proprietary unofficial solutions. A later solution where AmigaOS could directly support any graphics system, was termed
  

    retargetable graphics
   

  (RTG).
  

    [10]
   

  With AmigaOS 3.5, some RTG systems were bundled with the OS, allowing the use of common hardware cards other than the native Amiga chipsets. The main RTG systems are
  
   CyberGraphX
  
  ,
  
   Picasso 96
  
  and
  
   EGS
  
  . Some vector graphic libraries, like
  
   Cairo
  
  and
  
   Anti-Grain Geometry
  
  , are also available. Modern systems can use cross-platform
  
   SDL
  
  (simple DirectMedia Layer) engine for games and other multimedia programs.
 
  The Amiga did not have any inbuilt
  
   3D graphics
  
  capability, and so had no standard 3D graphics
  
   API
  
  . Later, graphics card manufacturers and third-party developers provided their own standards, which included
  
   MiniGL
  
  ,
  
   Warp3D
  
  , Storm
  
   Mesa
  
  (
  
   agl.library
  
  ) and
  
   CyberGL
  
  .
 
  The Amiga was launched at a time when there was little support for 3D graphics libraries to enhance desktop GUIs and computer rendering capabilities. However, the Amiga became one of the first widespread 3D development platforms.
  
   VideoScape 3D
  
  was one of the earliest 3D rendering and animation systems, and Silver/
  
   TurboSilver
  
  was one of the first ray-tracing 3D programs. Then Amiga boasted many influential applications in 3D software, such as
  
   Imagine
  
  , maxon's
  
   Cinema 4D
  
  ,
  
   Realsoft 3D
  
  ,
  
   VistaPro
  
  ,
  
   Aladdin 4D
  
  and NewTek's
  
   Lightwave
  
  (used to render movies and television shows like
  

    Babylon 5
   

  ).
 
  Likewise, while the Amiga is well known for its ability to easily
  
   genlock
  
  with video, it has no built-in
  
   video capture
  
  interface. The Amiga supported a vast number of third-party interfaces for video capture from American and European manufacturers. There were internal and external hardware solutions, called frame-grabbers, for capturing individual or sequences of video frames, including:
  
   Newtronic
  
  Videon,
  
   Newtek
  
  DigiView,
  

    [11]
   

  Graffiti external
  
   24-bit
  

   framebuffer
  
  , the
  
   Digilab
  
  , the
  
   Videocruncher
  
  ,
  
   Firecracker 24
  
  , Vidi Amiga 12, Vidi Amiga 24-bit and 24RT (Real Time), Newtek
  
   Video Toaster
  
  ,
  
   GVP
  

   Impact Vision IV24
  
  ,
  
   MacroSystem
  

   VLab Motion
  
  and
  
   VLab PAR
  
  , DPS
  
   PAR
  
  (Personal Animation Recorder),
  
   VHI (Video Hardware Interface)
  
  by IOSPIRIT GmbH,
  
   DVE-10
  
  , etc. Some solutions were hardware plug-ins for Amiga graphics cards like the
  
   Merlin XCalibur
  
  module, or the DV module built for the Amiga clone
  
   Draco
  
  from the German firm Macrosystem. Modern
  
   PCI
  
  bus TV expansion cards and their capture interfaces are supported through
  
   tv.library
  
  by Elbox Computer and
  
   tvcard.library
  
  by Guido Mersmann.
 
  Following modern trends in evolution of graphical interfaces,
  
   AmigaOS 4.1
  
  uses the 3D hardware-accelerated
  
   Porter-Duff
  
  image composition engine.
 
  Prior to version 3.5, AmigaOS only officially supported the Amiga's native
  
   sound chip
  
  , via
  
   audio.device
  
  . This facilitates playback of sound samples on four
  
   DMA
  
  -driven 8-bit
  
   PCM
  
  sound channels. The only supported hardware sample format is signed linear 8-bit
  
   two's complement
  
  .
 
  Support for third-party audio cards was vendor-dependent, until the creation and adoption of
  
   AHI
  


    [12]
   

  as a de facto standard. AHI offers improved functionality, such as seamless audio playback from a user-selected audio device, standardized functionality for audio recording and efficient software mixing routines for combining multiple sound channels, thus overcoming the four-channel hardware limit of the original Amiga chipset. AHI can be installed separately on AmigaOS v2.0 and later.
  

    [13]
   


  AmigaOS itself did not support
  
   MIDI
  
  until version 3.1, when Roger Dannenberg's
  
   camd.library
  
  was adapted as the standard MIDI API. Commodore's version of camd.library also included a built-in driver for the serial port. The later open source version of camd.library by Kjetil Matheussen did not provide a built-in driver for the serial port, but provided an external driver instead.
 
  AmigaOS was one of the first operating systems to feature
  
   speech synthesis
  
  with software developed by Softvoice, Inc., which allowed text-to-speech conversion of
  
   American English
  
  .
  

    [14]
   

  This had three main components:
  
   narrator.device
  
  , which modulates the
  
   phonemes
  
  used in
  
   American English
  
  ,
  
   translator.library
  
  , which translates English text to American English phonemes using a set of rules, and a high-level
  
   SPEAK:
  
  handler, which allows command-line users to redirect text output to speech. A utility called
  
   Say
  
  was included with the OS, which allowed text-to-speech synthesis with some control of voice and speech parameters. A demo was also included with
  
   AmigaBASIC
  
  programming examples. Speech synthesis was occasionally used in third-party programs, particularly educational software. For example, the word processors Prowrite and Excellence! could read out documents using the synthesizer. These speech synthesis components remained largely unchanged in later OS releases and Commodore eventually removed speech synthesis support from AmigaOS 2.1 onward because of licensing restrictions.
  

    [15]
   


  Despite the American English limitation of the
  
   narrator.device'
  
  s phonemes, Francesco Devitt developed an unofficial version with multilingual speech synthesis. This made use of an enhanced version of the
  
   translator.library
  
  which could translate a number of languages into phonemes, given a set of rules for each language.
  

    [16]
   


  The AmigaOS has a dynamically sized
  
   RAM disk
  
  , which resizes itself automatically to accommodate its contents. Starting with AmigaOS 2.x, operating system configuration files were loaded into the RAM disk on boot, greatly speeding operating system usage. Other files could be copied to the RAM disk like any standard device for quick modification and retrieval. Also beginning in AmigaOS 2.x, the RAM disk supported file-change notification, which was mostly used to monitor configuration files for changes.
 
  Starting with AmigaOS 1.3,
  

    [17]
   

  there is also a fixed-capacity recoverable RAM disk, which functions as a standard RAM disk but can maintain its contents on soft restart. It is commonly called the
  
   RAD disk
  
  after its default device name, and it can be used as a boot disk (with boot sector). Previously, a recoverable RAM disk, commonly called the
  
   ASDG RRD
  
  or
  
   VD0
  
  , was introduced in 1987;
  

    [18]
   

  at first, it was locked to ASDG expansion memory products. Later, the ASDG RRD was added to the
  
   Fred Fish
  
  series of freeware, shareware, and public domain software (disks 58
  

    [19]
   

  and 241
  

    [20]
   

  ).
 
  The AmigaOS has support for the
  
   Rexx
  
  language, called ARexx (short for "Amiga Rexx"), and is a script language which allows for full OS scripting, similar to
  
   AppleScript
  
  ; intra-application scripting, similar to
  
   VBA
  
  in
  
   Microsoft Office
  
  ; as well as inter-program communication. Having a single scripting language for any application on the operating system is beneficial to users, instead of having to learn a new language for each application.
 
  Programs can listen on an "ARexx port" for string messages. These messages can then be interpreted by the program in a similar fashion to a user pushing buttons. For example, an ARexx script run in an e-mail program could save the currently displayed email, invoke an external program which could extract and process information, and then invoke a viewer program. This allows applications to control other applications by sending data back and forth directly with memory handles, instead of saving files to disk and then reloading them.
 

   John C. Dvorak
  
  stated in 1996:
 
    I've had an Amiga for maybe a decade. It's the single most reliable piece of equipment I've ever owned. It's amazing! You can easily understand why so many fanatics are out there wondering why they are alone in their love of the thing. The Amiga continues to inspire a vibrant — albeit cultlike — community, not unlike that which you have with Linux, the Unix clone."
    

      [21]
     


  AmigaOS provides a
  
   modular
  
  set of system functions through
  
   dynamically-loaded shared libraries
  
  , either stored as a file on disk with a "
  
   .library
  
  " filename extension, or stored in the Kickstart firmware. All library functions are accessed via an indirect
  
   jump table
  
  , which is a negative offset to the library base pointer. That way, every library function can be
  
   patched
  
  or
  
   hooked
  
  at run-time, even if the library is stored in ROM. The core library of AmigaOS is the
  
   exec.library
  
  (
  
   Exec
  
  ), which provides an interface to functions of the Amiga's
  
   microkernel
  
  .
 

   Device drivers
  
  are also libraries, but they implement a standardized interface. Applications do not usually call devices directly as libraries, but use the
  
   exec.library
  
  I/O functions to indirectly access them. Like libraries, devices are either files on disk (with the "
  
   .device
  
  " extension), or stored in the Kickstart ROM.
 
  The higher-level part of device and resource management is controlled by
  
   handlers
  
  , which are not libraries, but
  
   tasks
  
  , and communicate by passing messages. One type of handler is a
  
   filesystem
  
  handler. The AmigaOS can make use of any filesystem for which a handler has been written, a possibility that has been exploited by programs like
  
   CrossDOS
  
  and by a few "alternative" file systems to the standard
  
   OFS
  
  and
  
   FFS
  
  . These file systems allow one to add new features like
  
   journaling
  
  or
  
   file privileges
  
  , which are not found in the standard operating system. Handlers typically expose a
  
   device name
  
  to the
  
   DOS
  
  , which can be used to access the peripheral (if any) associated with the handler. As an example of these concepts is the
  
   SPEAK: handler
  
  which could have text redirected to spoken speech, through the speech synthesis system.
 
  Device names are
  
   case insensitive
  
  (uppercase by convention) strings followed by a
  
   colon
  
  . After the colon a
  
   specifier
  
  can be added, which gives the handler additional information about
  
   what
  
  is being accessed and
  
   how
  
  . In the case of filesystem, the specifier usually consists of a
  
   path
  
  to a file in the filesystem; for other handlers, specifiers usually set characteristics of the desired input/output channel (for the
  
   SER:
  
  serial port driver, for example, the specifier will contain
  
   bit rate
  
  ,
  
   start and stop bits
  
  , etc.). Filesystems expose
  
   drive names
  
  as their device names. For example,
  
   DF0:
  
  by default refers to the first floppy drive in the system. On many systems
  
   DH0:
  
  is used to refer to the first hard drive. Filesystems also expose
  
   volume names
  
  , following the same syntax as device names: these identify the specific medium in the file system-managed drive. If
  
   DF0:
  
  contains a disk named "Workbench", then
  
   Workbench:
  
  will be a volume name that can be used to access files in
  
   DF0:
  
  . If one wanted to access a file named "Bar" located in directory "Foo" of the disk with name "Work" in drive
  
   DF0:
  
  , one could write "
  
   DF0:Foo/Bar
  
  " or "
  
   Work:Foo/Bar
  
  ". However, these are not completely equivalent, since when the latter form is used, the system knows that the wanted volume
  
   is
  
  "Work" and not just any volume in
  
   DF0:
  
  . Therefore, whenever a requested file on "Work" is being accessed without volume "Work" being present in any drive, it will say something to the effect of:
  
   Please insert volume Work in any drive
  
  .
 

   Programs
  
  often need to access files without knowing their physical location (either the drive or the volume): they only know the "logical path" of the file, i.e. whether the file is a library, a documentation file, a translation of the program's messages, and so on. This is solved in AmigaOS by the use of
  
   assigns
  
  . An assign follows, again, the same syntax as a device name; however, it already points to a directory inside the filesystem. The place an assign points to can be changed at any time by the user (this behavior is similar to, but nevertheless distinct from, the
  
   subst
  
  command in
  
   MS-DOS
  
  , for example). Assigns were also convenient because one logical assign could point to more than one different physical location at the same time, thereby allowing an
  
   assign
  
  ′s contents to expand logically, while still maintaining a separate physical organization. Standard assigns that are generally present in an AmigaOS system include:
 

   AmigaOS 4
  
  introduced new system for allocating RAM and defragmenting it "on the fly" during system inactivities. It is based on
  
   slab allocation method
  
  and there is also present a
  
   memory pager
  
  that arbitrates paging memory and allows the swapping of large portions of physical RAM on mass storage devices as a sort of
  
   virtual memory
  
  .
  

    [22]
   



    [23]
   

  Co-operative
  
   paging
  
  was finally implemented in
  
   AmigaOS 4.1
  
  .
 
  Since the introduction of AmigaOS in 1985 there have been four major versions and several minor revisions. Up until release 3.1 of the Amiga's operating system, Commodore used
  
   Workbench
  
  to refer to the entire Amiga operating system. As a consequence Workbench was commonly used to refer to both the operating system and the file manager component. For end users Workbench was often synonymous with AmigaOS. From version 3.5 the OS was renamed "AmigaOS" and pre-3.5 versions were also retroactively referred to as "AmigaOS" (rather than Workbench). Subsequently, "Workbench" refers to the native graphical file manager only.
 
  From its inception, Workbench offered a highly customizable interface. The user could change the aspect of program icons replacing it with newer ones with different color combinations. Users could also take a "snapshot" of icons and windows so the icons will remain on the desktop at coordinates chosen by user and windows will open at the desired size.
 
  AmigaOS 1.0 was released with the first Amiga, the
  
   Amiga 1000
  
  , in 1985. The 1.x versions of AmigaOS by default used a garish blue and orange color scheme, designed to give high contrast on even the worst of television screens (the colors can be changed by the user). Versions 1.1 consists mostly of bug fixes and, like version 1.0, was distributed for the Amiga 1000 only.
 
  The display was highly customizable for the era. The user was free to create and modify system and user icons, which could be of arbitrary size and design and can have two image states to produce a pseudo-animated effect when selected. Users could customize four display colors and choose from two resolutions:
  
   640×200
  
  or
  
   640×400
  
  (interlaced) on
  
   NTSC
  
  , or
  
   640×256
  
  or
  
   640×512
  
  on
  
   PAL
  
  systems. In later revisions, the TV or monitor overscan could be adjusted.
 
  Several features were deprecated in later versions. For example, the gauge meter showing the free space on a file system was replaced with a percentage in AmigaOS 2.0. Under Workbench 1.x, right-clicking on icons opens a display of the files' metadata
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  ; whereas from Workbench 2.0 onwards, right-clicking activates pull-down menus only. The default "busy" pointer (a comic balloon showing "Zzz...") was replaced with a stopwatch in later versions.
 
  AmigaOS 2.0 was released with the launch of the
  
   Amiga 3000
  
  in 1990. Until AmigaOS 2.0 there was no unified
  
   look and feel
  
  design standard and application developers had to write their own widgets (both buttons and menus) if they wished to enhance the already-meager selection of standard basic widgets provided by Intuition. With AmigaOS 2.0
  
   gadtools.library
  
  was created, which provided standard widget sets. The
  
   Amiga User Interface Style Guide
  
  , was published which explained how applications should be laid out for consistency. Intuition was improved with
  
   BOOPSI
  
  (Basic Object Oriented Programming system for Intuition) which enhanced the system with an
  
   object-oriented
  
  interface to define a system of classes in which every class individuate a single widget or describes an interface event. It can be used to program object oriented interfaces into Amiga at any level.
 
  AmigaOS 2.0 also added support for
  
   public screens
  
  . Instead of the AmigaOS screen being the only shareable screen, applications could create their own named screens to share with other applications.
 
  AmigaOS 2.0 introduced
  

    AmigaGuide
   

  , a simple text-only
  
   hypertext
  
  markup scheme and browser, for providing online help inside applications. It also introduced
  
   Installer
  
  , a standard software installation program, driven by a
  
   LISP
  
  -like scripting language.
 
  AmigaOS 2.0 rectified the problem of applications
  
   hooking
  
  directly into the input-events stream to capture keyboard and mouse movements, sometimes locking up the whole system. AmigaOS 2.0 provided
  
   Commodities
  
  , a standard interface for modifying or scanning input events. This included a standard method for specifying global "hotkey" key-sequences, and a
  
   Commodities Exchange
  
  registry for the user to see which commodities were running.
 
  AmigaOS 2.1 introduced multi-lingual locale support through
  
   locale.library
  
  and for the first time AmigaOS was translated to different languages.
  

    [15]
   


  Version 3.0 was originally shipped with the Amiga 1200 and Amiga 4000 computers. Version 3.0 added datatypes support which allowed any application that supported datatypes to load any file format supported by datatypes. Workbench could load any background image in any format if the required datatype was installed. A tiny application called Multiview was included that could open and display any supported file. Its capabilities were directly related to the datatypes installed in Devs:Datatypes. The established AmigaGuide hypertext system gained more usability by using document links pointing to media files, for example pictures or sounds, all recognized by the datatypes.
 
  Around six years after AmigaOS 3.1 was released, following Commodore's demise,
  
   Haage & Partner
  
  were granted a license to update AmigaOS, which was released in 1999 as a software-only update for existing systems.
 
  The AmigaOS
  
   look and feel
  
  , though still largely based on the earlier 3.1 release was revised somewhat, with an improved user interface based on ReAction, improved icon rendering and official support for
  
   true color
  

   backdrops
  
  . These releases included support for existing third-party GUI enhancements, such as
  
   NewIcons
  
  , by integrating these patches into the system. The 3.5 and 3.9 releases included a new set of 256 color icons and a choice of desktop wallpaper. These replaced the default all-metal gray 4/8 color scheme used on AmigaOS from release 2.0 to 3.1.
 
  The 3.9 release of AmigaOS was again developed by Haage&Partner and released in 2000. The main improvements were the introduction of a program start bar called AmiDock, revised user interfaces for system settings and improved utility programs.
 
  This new AmigaOS, called AmigaOS 4.0 has been rewritten to become fully
  
   PowerPC
  
  compatible. It was initially developed on Cyberstorm PPC, as making it independent of the old Amiga chipsets wasn't trivial.
  

    [24]
   

  Since the
  
   fourth Developer Pre-Release Update
  
  a new technique is adopted and the screens are draggable in any direction.
  

    [25]
   


   Drag and drop
  
  of Workbench icons between different screens is possible too.
 
  Also in AmigaOS 4.0 were new version of Amidock,
  
   TrueType
  
  /
  
   OpenType
  
  fonts and movie player with
  
   DivX
  
  and
  
   MPEG-4
  
  support.
 
  In AmigaOS 4.1, a new Start-up preferences feature was added which replaced WBStartup drawer. Additional enhancements were a new icon set to complement higher screen resolutions, new window themes including drop shadows, AmiDock with true transparency, scalable icons and AmigaOS with auto-update feature.
  

    [26]
   



   AROS Research Operating System
  
  (AROS) implements the AmigaOS API in a portable open-source operating system. Although not binary-compatible with AmigaOS (unless running on 68k), users have reported it to be highly source-code-compatible.
 

   MorphOS
  
  is a PowerPC native operating system which also runs on some Amiga hardware. It implements AmigaOS API and provides binary compatibility with "OS-friendly" AmigaOS applications (that is, those applications which do not access any native, legacy Amiga hardware directly just as AmigaOS 4.x unless it's executed on real Amiga models).
 

   pOS
  
  was a multiplatform closed-source operating system with source code-level compatibility with existing Amiga software.
  

    [27]
   



   BeOS
  
  features also a centralized datatype structure similar to Mac OS Easy Open after old Amiga developers requested Be to adopt Amiga datatype service. It allows the entire OS to recognize all kinds of files (text, music, videos, documents, etc.) with standard
  
   file descriptors
  
  . The datatype system provides the entire system and any productivity tools with standard loaders and savers for these files, without the need to embed multiple file-loading capabilities into any single program.
  

    [28]
   



   AtheOS
  
  was inspired by AmigaOS, and originally intended to be a clone of AmigaOS.
  

    [29]
   


   Syllable
  
  is a fork of AtheOS, and includes some AmigaOS- and
  
   BeOS
  
  -like qualities.
 
  Finally, the operating system of the
  
   3DO Interactive Multiplayer
  
  bore a very strong resemblance to AmigaOS and was developed by
  
   RJ Mical
  
  ,
  

    [30]
   

  the creator of the Amiga's
  
   Intuition
  
  user interface.
  

    [31]
   

