


       Bluetooth 4.0
      

  The
  
   iPad Mini 2
  
  (stylized and marketed as the
  
   iPad mini 2
  
  , previously marketed as the
  
   iPad mini with Retina display
  
  ) is the second generation
  
   iPad Mini
  

   tablet computer
  
  produced and marketed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  It has a design almost identical to that of the
  
   first generation iPad Mini
  
  but features internal revisions such as the addition of the
  
   A7
  

   system-on-a-chip
  
  and 2,048 x 1,536 resolution
  
   Retina Display
  
  .
  

    [4]
   

  The iPad Mini 2 has nearly the same hardware as its larger sibling, the
  
   iPad Air
  
  . Apple quietly released the iPad Mini 2 in Space Gray and Silver colors on November 12, 2013.
 
  Its successor, the
  
   iPad Mini 3
  
  , was unveiled on October 16, 2014, featuring the same internals but adding Touch ID, differing storage sizes, and an additional gold color.
 
  The iPad Mini 2 was discontinued on March 21, 2017, following the press announcement of a new, lower cost
  
   iPad
  
  , which replaces the
  
   iPad Air 2
  
  .
 


  The iPad Mini 2 was announced during a keynote at the
  
   Yerba Buena Center for the Arts
  
  on October 22, 2013.
  

    [5]
   

  The theme of the keynote was named 'We still have a lot to cover.'
  

    [6]
   

  Originally, at the time of its release, the iPad Mini 2 was officially marketed as the "iPad Mini with Retina Display". However, when the
  
   iPad Mini 3
  
  was announced on October 16, 2014, Apple started marketing the second generation iPad Mini as iPad Mini 2.
 
  The iPad Mini 2 comes with the
  
   iOS 7
  
  operating system, released on September 18, 2013.
  

    [7]
   


   Jonathan Ive
  
  , the designer of iOS 7's new elements, described the update as "bringing order to complexity", highlighting features such as refined typography, new icons, translucency, layering, physics, and gyroscope-driven
  
   parallaxing
  
  as some of the major changes to the design. The design of both iOS 7 and
  
   OS X Mavericks
  
  (version 10.9) noticeably depart from
  
   skeuomorphic
  
  elements such as green felt in
  
   Game Center
  
  , wood in
  
   Newsstand
  
  , and leather in
  
   Calendar
  
  , in favor of a flat, colourful design.
  

    [8]
   


  It can act as a
  
   hotspot
  
  with some carriers, sharing its Internet connection over Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, or USB, and also access the
  
   Apple App Store
  
  , a digital
  
   application
  

   distribution
  
  platform for iOS. The service allows users to browse and download
  
   applications
  
  from the
  
   iTunes Store
  
  that were developed with
  
   Xcode
  
  and the
  
   iOS SDK
  
  and were published through Apple. From the App Store,
  
   GarageBand
  
  ,
  
   iMovie
  
  ,
  
   iPhoto
  
  , and the
  
   iWork
  
  apps (
  
   Pages
  
  ,
  
   Keynote
  
  , and
  
   Numbers
  
  ) are available.
  

    [9]
   

  The iPad mini 2 has a bluetooth function that attaches a wireless keyboard or headset. This allows the user to access a wireless keyboard that can be used in Apple Pages or any writing program that needs editing.
 
  The iPad Mini 2 comes with several pre-installed applications, including
  
   Siri
  
  ,
  
   Safari
  
  , Mail, Photos, Video, Music, iTunes, App Store, Maps, Notes, Calendar,
  
   Game Center
  
  , Photo Booth, and Contacts.
  

    [10]
   

  Like all
  
   iOS
  
  devices, the iPad can sync content and other data with a Mac or PC using iTunes, although iOS 5 and later can be managed and backed up without a computer. Although the tablet is not designed to make phone calls over a cellular network, users can use a headset or the built-in speaker and microphone to place phone calls over Wi-Fi or cellular using a
  
   VoIP
  
  application, such as
  
   Skype
  
  .
  

    [11]
   

  The device has a
  
   dictation
  
  application, using the same voice recognition technology as the
  
   iPhone 4S
  
  . This enables users to speak and the iPad types what they say on the screen, though the iPad must have an internet connection available (via Wi-Fi or cellular network) due to the feature's reliance on Apple servers to translate the speech.
  

    [12]
   


  The iPad Mini 2 has an
  
   iBooks
  
  application (originally an optional app, though since the release of iOS 8, it comes pre-installed), which displays books and other
  
   ePub
  
  -format content downloaded from the
  
   iBooks Store
  
  .
  

    [13]
   

  Several major book publishers including
  
   Penguin Books
  
  ,
  
   HarperCollins
  
  ,
  
   Simon & Schuster
  
  and
  
   Macmillan
  
  have committed to publishing books for the device.
  

    [14]
   

  Despite being a direct competitor to both the
  
   Amazon Kindle
  
  and
  
   Barnes & Noble Nook
  
  ,
  

    [15]
   

  both
  
   Amazon.com
  
  and
  
   Barnes & Noble
  
  offer e-reader apps for the iPad.
  

    [16]
   



    [17]
   



   Siri
  
  , an
  
   intelligent personal assistant
  
  and
  
   knowledge navigator
  
  , is included. The application uses a
  
   natural language user interface
  
  to answer questions, make recommendations, and perform actions by delegating requests to a set of
  
   Web services
  
  . Apple claims that the software adapts to the user's individual preferences over time and personalizes results.
  

    [18]
   

  iOS 7 adds new male and female voices, new system setting functionalities, a redesign to match the rest of the operating system, and integration with Twitter, Wikipedia, Bing, and Photos.
  

    [19]
   

  Facebook comes integrated through Apple's native apps. Facebook features can be directly accessed from within native apps such as Calendar which can sync Facebook events, or use Facebook's
  
   like button
  
  from within the
  
   Apple App Store
  
  .
  

    [20]
   



    [21]
   


  On June 2, 2014, it was announced that the iPad Mini 2 would receive the
  
   iOS 8
  
  update.
  

    [22]
   

  On June 13, 2016, it was then announced that the iPad Mini 2 will support the iOS 10 update.
 
  The iPad Mini 2 has the same sized 7.9-inch screen, and largely the same design as, the first generation
  
   iPad Mini (1st generation)
  
  . One notable change is the inclusion of a
  
   Retina Display
  
  , matching the screen resolution of the
  
   full-sized
  
  Retina iPad models. As the Mini 2 features the same resolution as the iPad Air, this makes the Mini 2's screen even more pixel dense compared to its larger sibling.
 
  The
  
   slate
  
  -colored back panel of the first-generation iPad Mini was discontinued in favor of "Space Gray" (a lighter grey tone), whilst the Silver color option still remained.
 
  The iPad Mini 2 shares hardware components from the iPad Air and
  
   iPhone 5S
  
  , notably the
  
   64-bit
  

   Apple A7
  
  system-on-chip and
  
   Apple M7
  
  motion processor. The Mini 2's A7 system-on-chip is clocked slightly slower but otherwise the same as the one in the iPad Air and iPhone 5S, all three which were released in Q4 of 2013.
 
  The Mini 2 uses the same home button as its predecessor and therefore does not support
  
   Touch ID
  
  , a feature added in the succeeding
  
   iPad Mini 3
  
  . The Mini 2 also includes a 5 megapixel rear-facing camera, a 1.2 MP FaceTime HD front-facing camera, support for
  
   802.11n
  
  , and an estimated 10 hours of battery life.
  

    [23]
   


  As with all previous generations of iPad hardware, there are four buttons and one switch on the iPad Mini 2. With the device in its portrait orientation, these are: a "home" button on the face of the device under the display that returns the user to the home screen, a
  
   wake/sleep
  
  button on the top edge of the device, and two buttons on the upper right side of the device performing
  
   volume up/down
  
  functions, under which is a switch whose function varies according to device settings, functioning either to switch the device into or out of silent mode or to lock/unlock the orientation of the screen.
  

    [23]
   

  In addition, the WiFi only version weighs 331 grams while the cellular model weighs 341 grams – slightly more than their respective predecessors. The display responds to other sensors: an ambient light sensor to adjust screen brightness and a 3-axis
  
   accelerometer
  
  to sense orientation and switch between
  
   portrait and landscape
  
  modes.
  

    [24]
   

  Unlike the
  
   iPhone
  
  and
  
   iPod Touch
  
  's built-in applications, which work in three orientations (portrait, landscape-left and landscape-right), the iPad's built-in applications support
  
   screen rotation
  
  in all four orientations, including upside-down. Consequently, the device has no intrinsic "native" orientation; only the relative position of the home button changes.
  

    [23]
   


  The audio playback of the iPad Mini 2 is in stereo with two speakers located on either side of the lightning connector.
 
  The iPad Mini 2 was originally available with 16, 32, 64 or 128GB of internal
  
   flash memory
  
  , with no expansion option. However, as of the announcement of the
  
   iPad Mini 3
  
  on October 16, 2014, the 64 and 128GB versions of the iPad Mini 2 were discontinued and, on September 7, 2016 the 16GB model was discontinued as well, leaving only the 32GB model available for sale, at a cheaper price. Apple also sells a "camera connection kit" with an
  
   SD card
  
  reader, but it can only be used to transfer photos and videos.
  

    [23]
   


  All iPad Mini 2 models can connect to a
  
   wireless LAN
  
  and offer dual band Wi-Fi support. It is also manufactured either with or without the capability to communicate over a
  
   cellular network
  
  . The tablet's cellular model comes in two variants, both of which support nano-SIMs, quad-band GSM, penta-band
  
   UMTS
  
  , and dual-band CDMA EV-DO Rev. A and B. Additionally, one variant also supports LTE bands 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 13, 17, 18, 19, 20, 25 and 26 while the other variant supports LTE bands 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 18, 19, 20 and
  
   TD-LTE
  
  bands 38, 39 and 40. Apple's ability to handle many different bands in one device allowed it to offer, for the first time, a single iPad variant which supports all the cellular bands and technologies deployed by all the major North American wireless providers at the time of the device's introduction.
 
  The Mini 2 was praised for packing essentially same hardware as the larger and more expensive iPad Air, while being significantly more compact and lighter, featuring an even more pixel-dense screen (keeping the same resolution despite a smaller display), and being $100 USD cheaper than the Air. The Mini 2 essentially rendered obsolete the similarly-priced iPad 2 and iPad 4, which remained in Apple's iPad lineup during the first year of the Mini 2's availability as a budget alternative to the iPad Air. Writing for
  
   TechRadar
  
  , Gareth Beavis awarded the iPad Mini 2 a rating of 4.5 out of 5. Beavis praises the retina display and A7 chip performance, and states that its "design is still the best in the tablet category." However, he does criticize the price increase.
  

    [26]
   

  On his website,
  
   AnandTech
  
  ,
  
   Anand Lal Shimpi
  
  highly compliments the design and increased speed of the iPad Mini 2 while lamenting the limited color palette, stating "...it’s a shame that this is a tradeoff that exists between the two iPads especially given how good Apple is about sRGB coverage in nearly all of its other displays."
  

    [27]
   

  Despite some criticisms, such as the quality of the camera, Jeffrey Van Camp of
  
   Digital Trends
  
  gave the tablet a score of 4.5 out of 5. He writes: "The iPad Mini 2 is our favorite tablet of 2013. With a powerful 64-bit A7 processor and a high-resolution ‘Retina’ screen, it finishes the job that Apple started with the first iPad Mini", addressing the main complaints about the original Mini's under-powered processor and low-resolution display.
  

    [28]
   


  Like other contemporary iPads, the Mini 2's rear camera photo quality was mediocre compared to the iPhones. The iPad Mini 2 was also considerably more expensive than its closest Android competitor, the
  
   Nexus 7
  
  , although the Mini 2 was significantly more powerful and had better build quality as well as Apple's larger tablet-specific app selection and more established ecosystem. The iPad Mini 2 was criticized for being thicker and heavier than the original iPad Mini. It was also criticized for taking a longer time to charge.
  

    [29]
   

