

  A
  
   mobile operating system
  
  (or
  
   mobile OS
  
  ) is an operating system for
  
   smartphones
  
  ,
  
   tablets
  
  , or other
  
   mobile devices
  
  . While computers such as typical
  
   laptops
  
  are mobile, the operating systems usually used on them are not considered mobile ones, as they were originally designed for
  
   desktop computers
  
  that historically did not have or need specific
  
   mobile
  
  features. This distinction is becoming blurred in some newer operating systems that are hybrids made for both uses. So-called mobile operating systems, or even only
  
   smartphones
  
  running them, now represent most (web) use (on weekends and averaged for whole weeks). Mobile operating systems, are now, as of late 2016, the most used kind, with traditional desktop OS, now a minority used kind; see
  
   usage share of operating systems
  
  . However, variations occur in popularity by regions, while desktop-minority also applies on some days in e.g., the US and UK.
 
  Mobile operating systems combine features of a
  
   personal computer
  
  operating system with other features useful for mobile or handheld use; usually including, and most of the following considered essential in modern mobile systems; a
  
   touchscreen
  
  ,
  
   cellular
  
  ,
  
   Bluetooth
  
  ,
  
   Wi-Fi Protected Access
  
  ,
  
   Wi-Fi
  
  ,
  
   Global Positioning System
  
  (GPS) mobile navigation,
  
   camera
  
  ,
  
   video camera
  
  ,
  
   speech recognition
  
  ,
  
   voice recorder
  
  ,
  
   music player
  
  ,
  
   near field communication
  
  , and
  
   infrared blaster
  
  . By the end of 2016, over 430 million smartphones were sold with 81.7 percent running
  
   Android
  
  , 17.9 percent running
  
   iOS
  
  , 0.3 percent running
  
   Windows Mobile
  
  and the other OSes cover 0.1 percent.
  

    [1]
   


  Mobile devices with mobile communications abilities (e.g., smartphones) contain two mobile operating systems – the main user-facing software platform is supplemented by a second low-level proprietary
  
   real-time operating system
  
  which operates the radio and other hardware. Research has shown that these low-level systems may contain a range of security vulnerabilities permitting malicious
  
   base stations
  
  to gain high levels of control over the mobile device.
  

    [2]
   


  Mobile operating system milestones mirror the development of
  
   mobile phones
  
  and
  
   smartphones
  
  :
 
  These operating systems often run atop baseband or other
  
   real time operating systems
  
  that handle hardware aspects of the phone.
 

   Android
  
  (based on the
  
   Linux kernel
  
  ) is a mobile operating system developed by
  
   Google Inc.
  


    [7]
   

  Besides having the largest installed base worldwide on smartphones, it is also the most popular operating system for
  
   general purpose computers
  
  (a category that includes desktop computers and mobile devices), even though Android is not a popular operating system for regular (desktop)
  
   personal computers
  
  (PCs). Although the Android operating system is
  
   free and open-source software
  
  ,
  

    [8]
   

  in devices sold, much of the software
  
   bundled
  
  with it (including Google apps and vendor-installed software) is
  
   proprietary software
  
  and closed source.
  

    [9]
   


  Android's releases before 2.0 (1.0, 1.5, 1.6) were used exclusively on mobile phones. Android 2.x releases were mostly used for mobile phones but also some tablets. Android 3.0 was a tablet-oriented release and does not officially run on mobile phones. While both phone and tablet compatibility was merged to Android 4.0. The current Android version is
  
   7.1 Nougat
  
  .
 
  Android's releases are named after sweets or dessert items, except for the first and second releases:
 
  Android Open Kang Project (
  
   AOKP
  
  ) is a custom ROM based on the
  
   Android
  
  Open Source Project (AOSP). Similar to
  
   CyanogenMod
  
  , AOKP allows Android users who can no longer obtain update support from their manufacturer to continue updating their Android version to the latest one based on official release from Google AOSP and heavy theme customization together with customizable system functions.
 

   ColorOS
  
  is a custom front-end touch interface, based on the
  
   Android
  
  Open Source Project (AOSP) and is developed by
  
   OPPO Electronics Corp.
  
  As of 2016
  

    [update]
   

  , OPPO officially releases ColorOS with every OPPO device, and released an official
  
   ROM
  
  for the
  
   OnePlus One
  
  .
 

   CyanogenMod
  
  is a custom mobile operating system based on the
  
   Android
  
  Open Source Project (AOSP). It is a custom ROM that was co-developed by the CyanogenMod community. The OS does not include any proprietary apps unless the user installs them. Due to its open source nature, CyanogenMod allows Android users who can no longer obtain update support from their manufacturer to continue updating their OS version to the latest one based on official release from Google AOSP and heavy theme customization. The current version of the OS is CyanogenMod 13 which is based on Android Marshmallow.
 
  On December 24th CyanogenMod announced
  
   on their blog
  
  that they would no longer be releasing any CyanogenMod updates. All development will be moved to
  
   LineageOS
  
  .
 
  Cyanogen OS is based on
  
   CyanogenMod
  
  and maintained by Cyanogen Inc, however it includes proprietary apps and it is only available for commercial uses.
 
  Emotion User Interface (EMUI) is a front-end touch interface developed by
  
   Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd.
  
  and is based on Google's
  
   Android
  
  Open Source Project (AOSP). EMUI is preinstalled on most Huawei and Honor devices.
 

   Flyme OS
  
  is an operating system developed by
  
   Meizu Technology Co., Ltd.
  
  , an open source OS based on
  
   Google
  

   Android
  
  Open Source Project (AOSP). Flyme OS is mainly installed on Meizu Smartphones such as the MX's series, however it also has official ROM support for a few Android devices.
 

   HTC Sense
  
  is a software suite developed by
  
   HTC
  
  , used primarily on the company's
  
   Android
  
  -based devices. Serving as a successor to HTC's
  
   TouchFLO 3D
  
  software for
  
   Windows Mobile
  
  , Sense modifies many aspects of the Android
  
   user experience
  
  , incorporating added features (such as an altered home screen and keyboard),
  
   widgets
  
  , HTC-developed applications, and redesigned applications. The first device with Sense, the
  
   HTC Hero
  
  , was released in 2009.
 

   Lineage Android Distribution
  
  is a custom mobile operating system based on the
  
   Android
  
  Open Source Project (AOSP). It serves as the successor to the highly popular custom ROM, CyanogenMod, from which it was forked in December 2016 when Cyanogen Inc. announced it was discontinuing development and shut down the infrastructure behind the project. Since Cyanogen Inc. retained the rights to the Cyanogen name, the project rebranded its fork as LineageOS.
 
  Similar to CyanogenMod, it does not include any proprietary apps unless the user installs them. It allows Android users who can no longer obtain update support from their manufacturer to continue updating their OS version to the latest one based on official release from Google AOSP and heavy theme customization.
 
  Mi User Interface (
  
   MIUI
  
  ), developed by the Chinese electronic company
  
   Xiaomi Inc.
  
  , is a mobile operating system based on the
  
   Android
  
  Open Source Project (AOSP). MIUI is mostly found in Xiaomi smartphones such as the Mi and Redmi Series, however it also has official ROM support for few Android devices. Although MIUI is based on AOSP, which is open source, it consists of closed source and proprietary software of its own.
 
  LG UX (formerly named
  
   Optimus UI
  
  ) is a front-end touch interface developed by
  
   LG Electronics
  
  with partners, featuring a full
  
   touch user interface
  
  . It is sometimes incorrectly identified as an operating system. LG UX is used internally by LG for sophisticated
  
   feature phones
  
  and
  
   tablet computers
  
  , and is not available for licensing by external parties.
 
  Optimus UI 2 which based on Android 4.1.2 has been released on the Optimus K II and the Optimus Neo 3. It features a more refined user interface compared to the prior version based on Android 4.1.1, would include together which new functionality such as voice shutter and quick memo.
 

   OxygenOS
  
  is based on the open source
  
   Android
  
  Open Source Project (AOSP) and is developed by
  
   OnePlus
  
  to replace Cyanogen OS on OnePlus devices such as the
  
   OnePlus One
  
  , and it is preinstalled on the
  
   OnePlus 2
  
  ,
  
   OnePlus 3
  
  , and OnePlus X.
  

    [14]
   

  As stated by Oneplus, OxygenOS is focused on stabilizing and maintaining of
  
   stock
  
  like those found on Nexus devices. It consists of mainly Google apps and minor UI customization to maintain the sleekness of
  
   pure
  
  Android.
 

   TouchWiz
  
  is a front-end touch interface developed by
  
   Samsung Electronics
  
  with partners, featuring a full
  
   touch user interface
  
  . It is sometimes incorrectly identified as an independent operating system. TouchWiz is used internally by Samsung for
  
   smartphones
  
  ,
  
   feature phones
  
  and
  
   tablet computers
  
  , and is not available for licensing by external parties. The Android version of TouchWiz also comes with Samsung-made apps preloaded (except starting with the
  
   Galaxy S6
  
  which have removed all Samsung pre-loaded apps installed, leaving one with
  
   Galaxy Apps
  
  , to save storage space and initially due to the removal of MicroSD).
 
  Current TouchWiz version list:
 
  ZenUI is a front-end touch interface developed by
  
   ASUS
  
  with partners, featuring a full
  
   touch user interface
  
  . ZenUI is used by Asus for its
  
   Android phones
  
  and
  
   tablet computers
  
  , and is not available for licensing by external parties. ZenUI also comes preloaded with Asus-made apps like ZenLink (PC Link, Share Link, Party Link & Remote Link).
 

   iOS
  
  (formerly named iPhone OS) is from
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  It has the second largest installed base worldwide on smartphones, but the largest profits, due to aggressive price competition between Android-based manufacturers.
  

    [15]
   

  It is closed source and proprietary, and is built on the open source
  
   Darwin
  
  operating system. The
  
   iPhone
  
  ,
  
   iPod Touch
  
  ,
  
   iPad
  
  and second or third-generation
  
   Apple TV
  
  all use
  
   iOS
  
  , which is derived from
  
   macOS
  
  .
 
  Native third party applications were not officially supported until the release of iPhone OS 2.0 on July 11, 2008. Before this, "
  
   jailbreaking
  
  " allowed third party applications to be installed, and this method is still available.
 
  Currently all iOS devices are developed by Apple and manufactured by
  
   Foxconn
  
  or another of Apple's partners.
 
  Current iOS version list:
 

   Windows 10 Mobile
  
  (formerly called
  
   Windows Phone
  
  ) is from
  
   Microsoft
  
  . It is closed source and proprietary. It has the third largest installed base on smartphones behind Android and iOS.
 
  Unveiled on February 15, 2010, Windows Phone includes a user interface inspired by Microsoft's
  

    Metro Design Language
   

  . It is integrated with Microsoft services such as
  
   OneDrive
  
  and Office,
  
   Xbox Music
  
  ,
  
   Xbox Video
  
  ,
  
   Xbox Live
  
  games and
  
   Bing
  
  , but also integrates with many other non-Microsoft services such as
  
   Facebook
  
  and
  
   Google accounts
  
  . Windows Phone devices are made primarily by
  
   Microsoft Mobile
  
  /
  
   Nokia
  
  , and also by
  
   HTC
  
  and
  
   Samsung
  
  .
 
  On 21 January 2015, Microsoft announced that the Windows Phone brand will be phased out and replaced with
  
   Windows 10 Mobile
  
  , bringing tighter integration and unification with its PC counterpart
  
   Windows 10
  
  , and provide a platform for smartphones and tablets with screen sizes under 8 inches.
 
  As of 2016, Windows 10 Mobile global market share dropped below 0.6%.
  

    [16]
   


  Current Windows Phone version list:
 

   Tizen
  
  is hosted by the
  
   Linux Foundation
  
  and support from the Tizen Association, guided by a Technical Steering Group composed of
  
   Intel
  
  and
  
   Samsung
  
  .
 
  Tizen is an operating system for devices including smartphones, tablets, in-vehicle infotainment (IVI) devices, and smart TVs. It is an open source system (however the SDK was closed source and proprietary) that aims to offer a consistent user experience across devices. Tizen's main components are the Linux kernel and the
  
   WebKit
  
  runtime. According to Intel, Tizen "combines the best of LiMo and MeeGo."
  
   HTML5
  
  apps are emphasized, with MeeGo encouraging its members to transition to Tizen, stating that the "future belongs to HTML5-based applications, outside of a relatively small percentage of apps, and we are firmly convinced that our investment needs to shift toward HTML5." Tizen will be targeted at a variety of platforms such as handsets, touch pc, smart TVs and in-vehicle entertainment.
  

    [17]
   



    [18]
   

  On May 17, 2013, Tizen released version 2.1, code-named Nectarine.
  

    [19]
   


  Currently, Tizen is the fourth largest Mobile OS in terms of market share. Tizen has the second-largest market share in the budget segment of smartphones in India as of Q4 2015.
 
  Current Tizen version list:
 

   Sailfish OS
  
  is from
  
   Jolla
  
  . It is open source with
  
   GNU General Public License
  
  (GPL) for middleware stack core which comes from MER. Sailfish due to Jolla's business model and due to alliances with various partners and due to intentional design of OS internals, is capable to adopt in several layers 3rd party software including Jolla software e.g. Jolla's UI is
  
   proprietary software
  
  (closed source), so such components can be proprietary with many different kinds of licences. However, user can replace them with open source components like e.g. NEMO UI instead Jolla's UI. Using 3rd party software extends usability but does not make the OS code close, in the same way as preinstalled MS Word (close source) on Linux device does not make Linux close source.
 
  After Nokia abandoned in 2011 the
  
   MeeGo
  
  project, most of the MeeGo team left Nokia, and established Jolla as a company to use MeeGo and
  
   Mer
  
  business opportunities. The MER standard allows it to be launched on any hardware with kernel compatible with MER. In 2012, Linux Sailfish OS based on MeeGo and using middleware of MER core stack distribution was launched for public use. The first device, the
  
   Jolla smartphone
  
  , was unveiled on 20 May 2013. In 2015,
  
   Jolla Tablet
  
  was launched and the
  
   BRICS
  
  countries declared it an officially supported OS there. Jolla started licensing Sailfish OS 2.0 for 3rd parties. Some devices sold are updateable to Sailfish 2.0 with no limits.
 
  Each Sailfish OS version release is named after a Finnish lake:
 

   Ubuntu Touch
  
  is from
  
   Canonical Ltd.
  
  . It is open source and uses the
  
   GPL
  
  license.
  

    [19]
   

  The OS is built on the Android Linux kernel, using Android drivers and services via an
  
   LXC
  
  container, but does not use any of the Java-like code of Android.
  

    [20]
   


  Current Ubuntu Touch version list:
 

   BlackBerry 10
  
  (based on the
  
   QNX
  
  OS) was from
  
   BlackBerry
  
  . As a smart phone OS, it was closed source and proprietary, and only ran on phones and tablets manufactured by Blackberry.
 
  One of the dominant platforms in the world in late 2000's, its global market share was reduced significantly by 2016. In late 2016, Blackberry announced that it will continue support them, with a promise to release 10.3.4.XXXX.
  

    [21]
   



    [22]
   


  Current BlackBerry 10 version list:
 
  In 1999,
  
   Research In Motion
  
  released its first BlackBerry devices, providing secure real-time push-email communications on wireless devices. Services such as BlackBerry Messenger provide the integration of all communications into a single inbox. In September 2012, RIM announced that the 200 millionth BlackBerry smartphone was shipped. As of September 2014, there were around 46 million active BlackBerry service subscribers.
  

    [23]
   

  In early 2010s, RIM has undergone a platform transition, changing its company name to
  
   BlackBerry Limited
  
  and making new devices on a new platform named "
  
   BlackBerry 10
  
  ".
  

    [24]
   



   Windows Mobile
  
  is a discontinued operating system from
  
   Microsoft
  
  that it replaced with Windows Phone.
  

    [7]
   



    [25]
   

  It is closed source and proprietary.
 
  The
  
   Windows CE
  
  operating system and Windows Mobile middleware was widely spread in Asia (which mostly uses Android now). The two improved variants of this operating system,
  
   Windows Mobile 6 Professional
  
  (for touch screen devices) and
  
   Windows Mobile 6 Standard
  
  , were unveiled in February 2007. It was criticized for having a user interface which is not optimized for touch input by fingers; instead, it is more usable with a
  
   stylus
  
  . Like iOS, and most other Mobile OS, it supports both touch screen, physical and Bluetooth keyboard configurations.
 
  Windows Mobile's market share sharply declined to only 5% in Q2 of 2010.
  

    [26]
   



    [27]
   

  Microsoft phased out the Windows Mobile OS to focus on Windows Phone.
 
  The
  
   Symbian
  
  platform was developed by
  
   Nokia
  
  for some models of smartphones. It is proprietary software. The operating system was discontinued in 2012, although a slimmed-down version for basic phones was still developed until July 2014. Microsoft officially shelved the platform in favor of Windows Phone after its acquisition of Nokia.
  

    [28]
   



   Firefox OS
  


    [29]
   

  is from
  
   Mozilla
  
  . It was an open source mobile operating system released under the
  
   Mozilla Public License
  
  built on the Android Linux kernel and used Android drivers, but did not use any Java-like code of Android.
 
  According to
  
   Ars Technica
  
  , "Mozilla says that B2G is motivated by a desire to demonstrate that the standards-based open Web has the potential to be a competitive alternative to the existing single-vendor application development stacks offered by the dominant mobile operating systems."
  

    [30]
   

  In September 2016, Mozilla announced that work on Firefox OS has ceased, and all B2G-related code would be removed from mozilla-central.
  

    [31]
   



   Bada
  
  platform (stylized as bada; Korean: 바다) was an operating system for mobile devices such as smartphones and tablet computers. It was developed by Samsung Electronics. Its name is derived from "바다 (bada)", meaning "ocean" or "sea" in Korean. It ranges from mid- to high-end smartphones. To foster adoption of Bada OS, since 2011 Samsung reportedly has considered releasing the source code under an open-source license, and expanding device support to include Smart TVs. Samsung announced in June 2012 intentions to merge Bada into the Tizen project, but would meanwhile use its own Bada operating system, in parallel with Google Android OS and Microsoft Windows Phone, for its smartphones. All Bada-powered devices are branded under the Wave name, but not all of Samsung's Android-powered devices are branded under the name Galaxy. On 25 February 2013, Samsung announced that it will stop developing Bada, moving development to
  
   Tizen
  
  instead.Bug reporting was finally terminated in April 2014.
  

    [32]
   



   webOS
  
  was developed by
  
   Palm
  
  , although some parts are open source. webOS is a proprietary mobile operating system running on the Linux kernel, initially developed by Palm, which launched with the
  
   Palm Pre
  
  . After being acquired by HP, two phones (the
  
   Veer
  
  and the
  
   Pre 3
  
  ) and a tablet (the
  
   TouchPad
  
  ) running webOS were introduced in 2011. On August 18, 2011, HP announced that webOS hardware would be discontinued,
  

    [33]
   

  but would continue to support and update webOS software and develop the webOS ecosystem.
  

    [34]
   

  HP released webOS as open source under the name Open webOS, and plans to update it with additional features.
  

    [35]
   

  On February 25, 2013 HP announced the sale of WebOS to
  
   LG Electronics
  
  , who used the operating system for its "smart" or Internet-connected TVs. However, HP retained patents underlying WebOS and cloud-based services such as the App Catalog.
 

   Palm OS
  
  /Garnet OS was from
  
   Access Co.
  
  It is closed source and proprietary.
  
   webOS
  
  was introduced by Palm in January 2009 as the successor to Palm OS with Web 2.0 technologies, open architecture and multitasking abilities.
 

   MeeGo
  
  was from non-profit organization
  
   The Linux Foundation
  
  . It is open source and GPL. At the 2010
  
   Mobile World Congress
  
  in Barcelona,
  
   Nokia
  
  and
  
   Intel
  
  both unveiled
  
   MeeGo
  
  , a mobile operating system that combined
  
   Moblin
  
  and Maemo to create an open-sourced experience for users across all devices. In 2011 Nokia announced that it would no longer pursue MeeGo in favor of Windows Phone. Nokia announced the
  
   Nokia N9
  
  on June 21, 2011 at the Nokia Connection event
  

    [36]
   

  in Singapore. LG announced its support for the platform.
  

    [37]
   


   Maemo
  
  was a platform developed by Nokia for
  
   smartphones
  
  and
  
   Internet tablets
  
  . It is open source and GPL, based on
  
   Debian GNU/Linux
  
  and draws much of its
  
   graphical user interface
  
  (GUI),
  
   frameworks
  
  , and
  
   libraries
  
  from the GNOME project. It uses the
  
   Matchbox
  
  window manager and the
  
   GTK
  
  -based
  
   Hildon
  
  as its GUI and
  
   application framework
  
  .
 
  In 2006, Android, iOS, and Windows Phone did not exist and only 64 million smartphones were sold.
  

    [38]
   

  In 2016 Q4, 431.53 million smartphones were sold and global market share was 81.7% for Android, 17.9% for iOS, 0.3% for Windows 10 Mobile and 0.1% for all other platforms.
  

    [39]
   


  According to
  
   StatCounter
  
  web use statistics (a proxy for all use), in the week from 7–13 November 2016, "mobile" (meaning
  
   smartphones
  
  ) alone (without tablets) overtook desktop, for the first time.
  

    [40]
   

  Mobile-majority applies to countries such as Paraguay in South America, Poland in Europe and Turkey; and most of Asia and Africa. The rest of the world is still desktop-majority, with it e.g. in the United States at 54.89% (but no not on all days).
  

    [41]
   

  On 22 October 2016 (and subsequent weekends), mobile has shown majority,
  

    [42]
   

  Since 27 October, the desktop hasn't shown majority, not even on weekdays. Formerly, according to
  
   StatCounter
  
  press release, the world has turned desktop-minority;
  

    [43]
   

  as of October 2016
  

    [update]
   

  , at about 49% desktop use for that month, but mobile wasn't ranked higher, tablet share had to be added to it to exceed desktop share.
 
  Note:
 


    [99]
   


  Microsoft’s has introduced universal apps—apps that will run on PCs, hybrids, laptops,smartphones and even the Xbox console.
  
   Artificial intelligence (AI)
  
  is a big step forward for mobile operating systems, particularly Android and iOS. At
  
   WWDC
  
  2016 (Worldwide Developers’ Conference), Apple announced that the QuickType foundation for text typing on an iOS device will now use deep learning to enable more intelligent predictive typing, using expanded context.
 

   Wearables
  
  , such as smart watches, have so far been positioned as the second screen for smartphones for checking mails, messages, handling calls and even using certain apps without having to take out the device. But both Google and Apple are now pushing towards making the upcoming
  
   Android Wear
  
  and
  
   WatchOS
  
  platforms less reliant on a paired smartphone; certain apps will be able to run on the smart watches, without needing a phone for data.
 