


   John Sculley III
  
  (born April 6, 1939) is an American businessman, entrepreneur and investor in high-tech
  
   startups
  
  . Sculley was vice-president (1970–1977) and president of
  
   Pepsi-Cola
  
  (1977–1983), until he became
  
   chief executive officer
  
  of
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  on April 8, 1983, a position he held until leaving in 1993. In May 1987, Sculley was named
  
   Silicon Valley
  
  's top-paid executive, with an annual salary of US$2.2 million.
  

    [2]
   


  Sales at Apple increased from $800 million to $8 billion under Sculley's management, although many attribute his success to the fact that Sculley joined the company just when Steve Jobs' visions and Steve Wozniak's creations had become highly lucrative.
  

    [3]
   

  However, his stint at Apple remains controversial due to his departure from founder
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  's sales structure, particularly regarding Sculley's decision to compete with
  
   IBM
  
  in selling computers to the same types of customers.
  

    [4]
   

  Others say that the "two clashed over management styles and priorities, Jobs focusing on future innovation and Sculley more on current product lines and profitability."
  

    [5]
   

  But Sculley ultimately was forced to step down as Apple CEO because he was opposed to licensing Macintosh software and was talking to
  
   Goldman-Sachs
  
  about splitting Apple into two companies. When Sculley left in May 1993, Apple had $2 billion in cash and $200 million in debt.
 
  Sculley is recognized worldwide as an expert in marketing, in part because of his early successes at PepsiCo, notably his introduction of the
  
   Pepsi Challenge
  
  , which allowed the company to gain market share from primary rival
  
   Coca-Cola
  
  .
  

    [6]
   

  He used similar marketing strategies throughout the 1980s and 1990s at Apple to mass-market
  
   Macintosh
  
  personal computers, and today he continues to speak and write about disruptive marketing strategies. Sculley is currently invested in and involved with a number of high-tech start-up companies, including 3CInteractive, XL Marketing (now rebranded as Zeta Interactive),
  

    [7]
   

  Inflexion Point, Mobeam, OpenPeak, x10 Credit, Pivot Acquisition Corp., nextSource and WorldMate. He is currently Chairman of the PeopleTicker and SkillsVillage.
  

    [8]
   



    [9]
   



   Jeff Daniels
  
  portrayed Sculley in the film
  

    Steve Jobs
   
   ,
  

   Matthew Modine
  
  portrayed him in the 2013 film
  

    Jobs
   
   ,
  
  and
  
   Allan Royal
  
  portrayed him in the 1999 TNT film
  

    Pirates of Silicon Valley
   
   .
  



  Sculley was born in
  
   New York City
  
  , the son of Margaret Blackburn (Smith), a
  
   horticulturist
  
  , and John Sculley, Jr., a
  
   Wall Street
  

   lawyer
  
  .
  

    [10]
   



    [11]
   

  Five days later, he was one of the first infants to fly over the
  
   Atlantic Ocean
  
  to his mother's home country,
  
   Bermuda
  
  , where his family first settled in 1934.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  Sculley and his brothers spent much of their childhood in Bermuda before moving back to New York. He attended high school at
  
   St. Mark's School
  
  in
  
   Southborough, Massachusetts
  
  .
  

    [12]
   


  Sculley ultimately received a
  
   bachelor's degree
  
  in architectural design from
  
   Brown University
  
  and an
  
   MBA
  
  from the
  
   Wharton School
  
  of the
  
   University of Pennsylvania
  
  .
  

    [13]
   


  Sculley joined the Pepsi-Cola division of PepsiCo in 1967 as a trainee, where he participated in a six-month training program at a
  
   bottling plant
  
  in
  
   Pittsburgh
  
  .
  

    [14]
   

  In 1970, at the age of 30, Sculley became the company's youngest marketing vice-president.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  Sculley initiated one of the company's first consumer-research studies, an extended in-home product test in which 350 families participated. As a result of the research, Pepsi decided to launch new, larger, and more varied packages of their soft drinks.
  

    [15]
   

  In 1970, Pepsi set out to dethrone Coca-Cola as the market leader of the industry, in what eventually became known as the
  
   Cola Wars
  
  . Pepsi began spending more on marketing and advertising, typically paying between US$200,000 and $300,000 for each television spot, while most companies spent between $15,000 and $75,000. With the Pepsi Generation campaign, Pepsi aimed to overturn Coca-Cola's classic marketing.
  

    [16]
   


  Sculley also took the position of managing PepsiCo's International Food Operations division, shortly after he visited a failing potato-chip factory in Paris. PepsiCo's food division was their only money-losing division, with revenues of US$83 million and losses of $156.5 million. To make the food division profitable, Sculley fired all the people from it
  
   Frito-Lay
  
  and improved product quality, as well as improving accounts and establishing financial controls.
  

    [17]
   

  Within three years, the food division was making US$300 million in revenues and $40 million in profit.
  

    [18]
   


  Sculley was best known at Pepsi for the
  
   Pepsi Challenge
  
  , an advertising campaign he started in 1975 to compete against Coca-Cola to gain market share, using heavily advertised taste tests. It claimed based on Sculley's own research that Pepsi-Cola tasted better than Coca-Cola. The Pepsi Challenge included a series of television advertisements that first aired in the early 1970s, featuring lifelong Coca-Cola drinkers participating in
  
   blind taste tests
  
  . Pepsi's soft drink was always chosen as the preferred product by the participant; however, these tests have been criticized as being biased.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  The Pepsi Challenge was mostly targeted at the Texas market, where Pepsi had a significantly lower
  
   market share
  
  at the time. The campaign was successful, significantly increasing Pepsi's market share in that state. At the time the Pepsi Challenge was started, Sculley was senior vice-president of United States sales and marketing operations at Pepsi.
  

    [19]
   

  Sculley himself took the taste test and picked Coke instead of Pepsi.
  

    [20]
   


  In 1977, Sculley was named Pepsi's youngest-ever CEO and president.
  

    [21]
   


  Apple lured Sculley away from Pepsi in order to apply his marketing skills to the personal computer market. Steve Jobs successfully sealed the deal after he made his legendary pitch to Sculley: "Do you want to sell sugared water for the rest of your life? Or do you want to come with me and change the world?"
  

    [22]
   

  Apple's president,
  
   Mike Markkula
  
  , wanted to retire and believed that Jobs, who wished to be the company's president, lacked the discipline and temperament needed to run Apple on a daily basis. Sculley, with his solid business background and considerable recent success, would give Apple an image of greater reliability and stability. From the time they first met in 1982 until 1985, Jobs and Sculley had what both acknowledged as an amazing partnership. Sculley used his marketing experience to help keep the aging Apple II generating much-needed cash and helped Jobs launch the Mac with the most admired consumer marketing campaign of its time. Jobs was the product czar and made all the product decisions.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  The
  
   Lisa
  
  computer, an innovative model designed by a team initially led by Jobs, became available in January 1983, and had disastrous sales. When Jobs' Macintosh, the first of a new series of models with a pioneering black-and-white
  
   graphical user interface
  
  , was shipped to stores in January 1984, Sculley raised the initial price to $2,495 from the originally planned $1,995, using the additional money for higher
  
   profit margins
  
  and expensive advertising campaigns.
  

    [23]
   

  Macintosh sold well, and received excellent reviews, but it did not put the
  
   IBM PC
  
  out of business. Some of the privileges of Jobs' elite development groups were trimmed, and projects were subject to stricter review for usefulness, marketability, feasibility, and reasonable cost.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  At the peak of the Macintosh success, Apple made an attempt to move unsold inventory of Lisa computers by renaming it to "Macintosh XL" and positioning it as a top-of-the-line pro Macintosh model. Since Lisa lacked the user-friendliness of the Macintosh, and did not use the Macintosh ROM or operating system, this idea had little success.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  At this point, a power struggle between Jobs and Sculley was becoming obvious. Jobs became "non-linear": he kept meetings running past midnight, sent out lengthy faxes, then called new meetings at 7:00 am.
  

    [24]
   

  Sculley had little control over the Macintosh division where Jobs was the general manager.
  

    [25]
   

  The Apple board of directors instructed Sculley to "contain" Jobs and limit his ability to launch expensive forays into untested products. Rather than submit to Sculley's direction, Jobs attempted to oust him from his leadership role at Apple. Sculley found out about Jobs's plans and called a board meeting at which Apple's board of directors sided with Sculley and removed Jobs from his managerial duties. Jobs resigned from Apple and founded
  
   NeXT Inc.
  
  the same year.
  

    [24]
   



    [26]
   

  Sculley said in 2015 that Jobs never forgave him and their friendship was never repaired.
  

    [27]
   


  After Jobs left, the company experienced a turnaround in 1986; one journalist wrote "since Sculley joined the company … many things have changed", and that his "strategy has worked".
  

    [28]
   

  Apple introduced a faster microprocessor and renamed "The Macintosh Office" "Desktop Publishing."
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  Under the direction of Sculley, who had learned several painful lessons after introducing the bulky
  
   Macintosh Portable
  
  in 1989, Apple introduced the
  
   PowerBook
  
  in 1991. The same year, Apple introduced
  
   System 7
  
  , a major upgrade to the operating system, which added color to the interface and introduced new networking capabilities. It remained the architectural basis for Mac OS until 2001, when the
  
   classic Mac OS
  
  was replaced by
  
   Mac OS X
  
  . The success of the PowerBook and other products brought increasing revenue. For some time, it appeared that Apple could do no wrong, introducing fresh new products and generating increasing profits in the process. The magazine
  

    MacAddict
   

  named the period between 1989 and 1991 as the "first golden age" of the Macintosh.
  

    [24]
   



   Microsoft
  
  threatened to discontinue
  
   Microsoft Office
  
  for the Macintosh if Apple did not license parts of the Macintosh graphical user interface to use in the
  
   Windows
  
  operating system. Under pressure, Sculley agreed, a decision which later affected the
  

    Apple v. Microsoft
   

  lawsuit. About that time, Sculley coined the term
  
   personal digital assistant
  
  (PDA) referring to the
  
   Apple Newton
  
  , one of the world's first PDAs.
  

    [29]
   


  In 1987, Sculley made several predictions in a
  

    Playboy
   

  interview.
  

    [30]
   

  He predicted that the
  
   Soviet Union
  
  would land a man on
  
   Mars
  
  within the next 20 years and claimed that optical storage media such as the
  
   CD-ROM
  
  would revolutionize the use of personal computers. Some of his ideas for the
  
   Knowledge Navigator
  
  were eventually fulfilled by the Internet and the
  
   World Wide Web
  
  during the 1990s and others by Apple itself with the introduction of
  
   Siri
  
  .
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  On December 5, 1992, Sculley, as Chairman, CEO and CTO of Apple Computer, Inc., gave a seminal speech regarding the future of the internet, entitled "The Dawn of a $3.5 Trillion Communications Mega-Industry: Information Access, Processing and Distribution in a Digital World." This was the keynote address to a packed house at the Harvard Business School's Burden Auditorium, as part of the inaugural student-run Harvard/MIT Communications 2000 Symposium (now known as the Harvard Business School Tech Club's annual
  
   Cyberposium
  
  ).
 
  In the early 1990s, Sculley led Apple to
  
   port
  
  its operating system to run on a new microprocessor, the
  
   PowerPC
  
  . Sculley later acknowledged such an act was his greatest mistake, indicating that he should instead have targeted the dominant
  
   Intel
  
  architecture.
  

    [31]
   

  After a bad first quarter in 1993, amid a personal-computer price war and internal tension over the company's direction,
  

    [32]
   

  Apple's board forced Sculley out.
  

    [33]
   

  He was replaced by
  
   German
  
  -born
  
   Michael Spindler
  
  , who had been Chief Operating Officer. Spindler was also ousted a year later.
  

    [34]
   


  After leaving Apple, Sculley has been a founding investor in
  
   MetroPCS
  
  , formerly General Wireless, and helped guide the company's brand marketing; MetroPCS became a multibillion-dollar public company on the New York Stock Exchange
  

    [35]
   

  until its acquisition by T-Mobile in 2013.
  

    [36]
   

  He built NFO Research from $25 million to $550 million in revenue, and sold it to IPG for $850 million. He helped launch and advised Hotwire.com, Intralinks (which was co-founded by his brother Arthur), and
  
   InPhonic
  
  ,
  
   Buy.com
  
  , and
  
   PeoplePC
  
  —each of which became billion dollar market cap public companies in the 1990s.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  Sculley went political in the early 1990s on behalf of
  
   Republican
  

   Tom Campbell
  
  , who in 1992 was running in the California Republican primary to be the party candidate for a
  
   United States Senate
  
  seat. Sculley hosted a fundraiser for Campbell at his ranch in
  
   Woodside
  
  . Sculley had become acquainted with
  
   Hillary Clinton
  
  , serving with her on a national education council. When
  
   Bill Clinton
  
  ran for president, Sculley supported him. Sculley sat next to Hillary Clinton during the President's first
  
   State of the Union
  
  address in January 1993.
  

    [37]
   


  In 1997, Sculley became the chairman of
  
   Live Picture
  
  , a California-based company, to oversee its push into high-quality, low-bandwidth imaging over the Internet. US$22M in venture capital was provided for the company. Sculley later left the company, but remained an investor. In 1999, Live Picture filed for federal bankruptcy protection as part of a plan to be acquired by MGI Software.
  

    [38]
   



    [39]
   


  In 1997, Sculley co-founded
  
   PopTech
  
  with
  
   Bob Metcalfe
  
  and several other dignitaries from the technology industry.
  

    [40]
   

  In 1998, he joined the board of directors of BuyComp LLC (now Buy.com), an Internet-only computer store. Two years later, he partnered with
  
   Dennis M. Lynch
  
  to launch Signature21, providing marketing services to small to medium-sized businesses. In 2001, Sculley and Lynch transitioned the company into a learning program for rising entrepreneurs. Months later, Lynch left the company, while Sculley continued to consult and work with small businesses, including InPhonic, whose board of directors he later joined. InPhonic is an online retailer of cell phones and wireless plans. Sculley's early leadership
  

    [41]
   

  helped steer InPhonic towards its successful IPO in 2004. Sculley served as the vice chairman of the InPhonic board of directors. InPhonic filed for
  
   Chapter 11
  
  in 2007.
  

    [42]
   


  In 2002, Sculley endorsed and invested in the
  
   Wine Clip
  
  ,
  

    [43]
   

  a wine accessory product, which claims to accelerate the aeration of wine by exposure to magnets. A year later he helped in the founding of
  
   Verified Person Inc.
  
  , an online pre-employment screening company. He currently
  
   [
   


      when?
     


   ]
  
  serves on the board of directors.
  

    [44]
   

  In 2004, Sculley joined the board of directors at
  
   OpenPeak
  
  , a maker of software for wireless consumer electronics, digital media, computers, and home systems.
  

    [45]
   

  In the same year, Sculley became a Venture Partner at Rho Ventures.
  

    [46]
   

  In March 2006, Sculley was named Chairman of IdenTrust (formerly Digital Signature Trust Company) a San Francisco-based firm focusing on verifying identity and boosting financial security.
  

    [47]
   


  Before speaking at the Silicon Valley 4.0 conference, Sculley was interviewed by
  
   CNET
  
  in October 2003, where he explained the mistakes he made at Apple concerning the
  
   Apple Newton
  
  and
  
   HyperCard
  
  .
  

    [48]
   

  Sculley cancelled Apple's first hand-held mobile tablet PenMac led by Paul Mercer with applications by
  
   Samir Arora
  
  and instead signed an agreement to work with Sharp Electronics on the Newton technology.
  

    [49]
   



    [50]
   

  Also in 2003, Sculley was interviewed by the
  
   BBC
  
  for the television documentary
  
   The World's Most Powerful
  
  episode
  
   Steve Jobs vs.
   
    Bill Gates
   

  , discussing his time at Apple during the 1980s as CEO. In 2010, he was interviewed for
  
   Cult of Mac
  
  on the topics of Steve Jobs and design.
  

    [51]
   

  Sculley has spoken at PopTech since its opening in 1997 every year except for 2005.
  

    [
    


       dead link
      


    ]
   



    [52]
   


  In 2007, Sculley co-founded the data company
  
   Zeta Global
  
  with business partner
  
   David A. Steinberg
  
  , and in January 2014 the data analytics firm XL Marketing, rebranded and incorporated its resources into Zeta Interactive, re-launching it as a Big Data-Driven Marketing firm.
  

    [53]
   

  On January 30, 2014, Sculley was a panelist at a forum organized by Zeta, which featured ad executives, marketers and
  
   NFL
  
  executive to discuss the changes in the way companies market and reach consumers since Sculley's time at Apple in 1984 when the computer company featured what became one of the first iconic Super Bowl ads—the
  
   1984 commercial
  
  .
  

    [54]
   

  In October 2016, Zeta Interactive was again rebranded as
  
   Zeta Global
  
  .
  

    [55]
   


  In 2014, Sculley co-founded
  
   Obi Mobiles
  
  , a smartphone brand aimed at the emerging markets. The company was renamed Obi Worldphone.
  

    [56]
   

  He has also been working in the
  
   health care industry
  
  , focusing on RxAdvance, a
  
   cloud
  
  -based platform that helps
  
   pharmaceutical companies
  
  , hospitals and insurers manage chronically ill patients living at home.
  

    [57]
   


  Sculley married Ruth, stepdaughter of PepsiCo president
  
   Donald Kendall
  
  in 1960, with whom he had two children. The couple divorced in 1965.
  

    [58]
   

  In 1978, he married Carol Lee Adams, ex-wife of a former PepsiCo vice president, ultimately divorcing in 2011.
  

    [58]
   

  In 2015, Adams filed a lawsuit alleging that Sculley did not disclose over $25 million in assets during their divorce proceedings.
  

    [59]
   



    [60]
   

  A spokesman for Sculley denied the allegations.
  

    [59]
   



    [60]
   


  Sculley married Diane Gibbs Poli, vice president and design coordinator for Wittman Building Corporation, in 2013 and they live in
  
   Palm Beach, Florida
  
  .
  

    [61]
   



    [62]
   

