


   System 7
  
  (codenamed "Big Bang" and sometimes retrospectively called
  
   Mac OS 7
  
  ) is a single-user
  
   graphical user interface
  
  -based
  
   operating system
  
  for
  
   Macintosh
  
  computers and was part of the
  
   classic Mac OS
  
  line of operating systems. It was introduced on May 13, 1991, by
  
   Apple Computer
  
  .
  

    [1]
   

  It succeeded
  
   System 6
  
  , and was the main Macintosh operating system until it was succeeded by
  
   Mac OS 8
  
  in 1997. Features added with the System 7 release included
  
   virtual memory
  
  , personal
  
   file sharing
  
  ,
  
   QuickTime
  
  ,
  
   QuickDraw 3D
  
  , and an improved user interface.
 
  "System 7" is often used generically to refer to all
  
   7.x versions
  
  . With the release of version 7.6 in 1997, Apple officially renamed the operating system "Mac OS", a name which had first appeared on System 7.5.1's boot screen. System 7 was developed for Macs that used the
  
   Motorola 680x0
  
  line of processors, but was ported to the
  
   PowerPC
  
  after Apple adopted the new processor.
 


  The development of the Macintosh "Systems" up to
  
   System 6
  
  followed a fairly smooth progression with the addition of new features and relatively small changes and upgrades over time. Major additions were fairly limited, notably adding Color QuickDraw and
  
   MultiFinder
  
  in System 6. Some perspective on the scope of the changes can be seen by examining the official system documentation,
  
   Inside Macintosh
  
  . This initially shipped in three volumes, adding another to describe the changes introduced with the
  
   Mac Plus
  
  ,
  

    [2]
   

  and another for the
  
   Mac II
  
  and
  
   Mac SE
  
  .
  

    [3]
   


  These limited changes meant that the original Mac system remained largely as it was when initially introduced. That is, the machine was geared towards a single user and task running on a
  
   floppy disk
  
  based machine of extremely limited
  
   RAM
  
  . However, many of the assumptions of this model were no longer appropriate. Most notable among these was the single-tasking model, the replacement of which had first been examined in 1986's "Switcher" and then replaced outright with MultiFinder in System 5. Running MultiFinder normally required larger amount of RAM and a
  
   hard drive
  
  , but these were becoming common by the late 1980s.
 
  While additions had been relatively limited, so had fixes to some of the underlying oddities of the system architecture. For instance, to support a limited form of multitasking, the original Mac OS supported small co-resident programs known as
  
   desk accessories
  
  which had to be installed into the
  
   Apple menu
  
  using special tools. If the system were able to support multiple tasks, this one-off solution would no longer be needed - desk accessories could simply be small programs, placed anywhere. Yet, as MultiFinder was still optional, such a step had not been taken. Numerous examples of this sort of problem could be found throughout the system.
 
  Finally, the widespread adoption of hard drives and
  
   local area networks
  
  led to any number of new features being requested from users and developers. By the late 1980s, the list of new upgrades and suggested changes to the existing model was considerable.
 
  In March 1988,
  

    [N 1]
   

  shortly after the release of System 6, technical middle managers at Apple held an offsite meeting to plan the future course of Mac OS development.
  

    [4]
   

  Ideas were written on
  
   index cards
  
  ; features that seemed simple enough to implement in the short term (like adding color to the
  
   user interface
  
  ) were written on blue cards, longer-term goals like true multitasking on pink cards, and "far out" ideas like an
  
   object-oriented
  

   file system
  
  on red cards.
  

    [5]
   



    [6]
   

  Development of the ideas contained on the blue and pink cards was to proceed in parallel, and at first the two projects were known simply as "blue" and "pink" (including
  
   Taligent
  
  ).
  

    [7]
   

  Apple intended to have the "blue" team (which came to call themselves the "
  
   Blue Meanies
  
  " after characters in
  

    Yellow Submarine
   

  )
  

    [8]
   

  release an updated version of the existing Macintosh operating system in the 1990–1991 timeframe, and the "pink" team to release an entirely new OS around 1993.
 
  As Blue was aimed at relatively "simple" upgrades, the feature list reads to some degree as a sort of "System 6, corrected". In the underlying OS, a number of formerly optional components were made mandatory:
 
  Furthermore, a number of oddities in the original System, typically included due to limited resources, were finally changed to use basic underlying OS features:
 
  The system also offered a wide variety of new features:
 
  System 7 was the first Apple operating system to be available on CD, although it shipped on a set of 15 floppy disks initially. Unlike earlier systems, System 7 itself did not come bundled with major software packages. Newly purchased
  
   Macintosh
  
  computers had System 7 installed and were often bundled with software such as
  
   HyperCard
  
  ,
  
   At Ease
  
  and
  
   Mouse Practice
  
  . Later, the
  
   Macintosh Performa
  
  series added various
  
   software bundles
  
  including
  
   third-party
  
  software such as
  
   ClarisWorks
  
  ,
  
   The New Grolier Multimedia Encyclopedia
  
  ,
  
   Microsoft Bookshelf
  
  ,
  
   Spectre VR
  
  and
  
   Power Pete
  
  . Since System 7 was introduced before the Internet came to popular attention, software such as
  
   MacTCP
  
  ,
  
   FreePPP
  
  and
  
   Netscape
  
  were not included at first, but was later available on disk from
  
   Internet service providers
  
  and bundled with books such as
  
   Adam C. Engst
  
  's
  
   Internet Starter Kit for Macintosh
  
  .
  
   PowerPC
  
  Macintoshes included
  
   Graphing Calculator
  
  . System 7 also included
  
   AppleTalk
  
  networking and file sharing software in the form of system extensions and control panels.
 
  The basic utilities installed by default with System 7 included
  
   TeachText
  
  (superseded by the more flexible
  
   SimpleText
  
  in later versions) for basic text editing tasks and reading
  
   readme
  
  documents. Also available on the additional "Disk Tools"
  
   floppy disk
  
  are
  
   Disk First Aid
  
  for disk repair and
  
   Apple HD SC Setup
  
  for initializing and partitioning disks.
 
  Later versions of System 7, specifically System 7.5 and Mac OS 7.6, came with a dedicated "Utilities" folder and "Apple Extras" folder including:
  
   AppleScript
  
  ,
  
   Disk Copy
  
  ,
  
   QuickDraw GX
  
  Extras and
  
   QuickTime
  
  Movie Player. More optional extras and utilities could be manually installed from the System CD.
 
  System 7.1.2 was the first version of the Mac OS to support Apple's new
  
   PowerPC
  
  -based computers. 68k applications which had not yet been updated to run natively on these systems were
  
   emulated
  
  transparently (without users' having to intervene) by a built-in
  
   68k processor emulator
  
  .
  
   Fat binaries
  
  , which contained the code necessary to run natively on both PowerPC and 68k systems, became common during this time. This process was similar to the distribution of
  
   universal binaries
  
  during Apple's transition from
  
   PowerPC
  
  to
  
   Intel
  
  processors in 2006.
 
  System 7.0 through 7.1 offered a utility called
  
   Apple File Exchange
  
  , which could access the contents of
  
   FAT
  
  - and
  
   Apple II
  
  -formatted floppy disks. System 7 Pro, System 7.5 and up shipped with
  
   PC Exchange
  
  , previously a separate product, which allowed the system to mount FAT-formatted
  
   floppy disks
  
  on the desktop in the same manner as regular Macintosh disks.
 

   OS/2
  
  disks were read as PC DOS disks, due to fact that OS/2 used the FAT file system. At this time, Macs could also read and write UNIX file systems with the help of extra software.
 
  System 7 allowed users to access PC networks and allowed communication via TCP/IP and other compatible networking stacks. Actual PC software compatibility, however, required third party software such as SoftPC, which allowed some MS-DOS and early Microsoft Windows programs to run, or Connectix
  
   Virtual PC
  
  , which allowed the Mac to run Windows via full PC emulation.
 
  Other PC compatibility solutions took a more native approach by running Windows and MS-DOS by using x86 expansion cards with an x86 chip on the card. Apple offered some systems configured this way, marketed as "DOS Compatible"—a card with dedicated x86 CPU and RAM was used, while the Mac hard drive, sound subsystem, networking and input provided services to the PC. The PC could run simultaneously with the Mac, and the user could switch between the two in a fashion similar to a
  
   KVM switch
  
  . The earliest of these systems were 680x0 based systems running System 7. System 7 provided the support for accessing the PC volume from the Mac through its own PC Exchange software, and actual control of the PC hardware was accomplished by way of control panels.
 
  At the time of its release, many users noticed that performance suffered as a result of upgrading from
  
   System 6
  
  to System 7, though newer hardware soon made up for the speed difference. Another problem was System 7's large "memory footprint": System 6 could boot the system from a single 800k
  
   floppy disk
  
  and took up about 600
  
   KB
  
  of
  
   RAM
  
  , whereas System 7 used well over a
  
   megabyte
  
  . It was some time before the average Mac shipped with enough RAM built in for System 7 to be truly comfortable. System 7 was the first system release that could no longer be usefully run on floppy-only systems. Although most Macintosh models sold at the time included a hard disk as standard equipment, owners of older models were required to upgrade by buying either a new Mac or external
  
   SCSI
  
  hard disk drive if they wished to run System 7.
 
  In order to take advantage of System 7's virtual memory feature, a Macintosh equipped with a
  
   PMMU
  
  is required. The Motorola 68030 CPU has one built-in, and one can be added to the motherboard of the 68020-equipped
  
   Macintosh II
  
  . The other Macintosh model using an '020, the
  
   Macintosh LC
  
  , cannot use virtual memory. Apple introduced the '030-equipped
  
   Macintosh LC II
  
  shortly after System 7's introduction. Despite the newer processor, the LCII retained the earlier model's 16-bit bus and did not perform any faster than the LC it replaced.
 
  Despite these setbacks, System 7.0 was adopted quite rapidly by Mac users, and quickly became one of the base requirements for new software.
 
  The engineering group within Apple responsible for System 7 came to be known as the "
  
   Blue Meanies
  
  ", named after the blue
  
   index cards
  
  on which were written the features that could be implemented in a relatively short time as part of Apple's operating system strategy. In comparison, the pink index card features were handled by the Pink group, later becoming the ill-fated
  
   Taligent
  
  project.
 
  System 7.0 would be the last version of the Macintosh operating system that Apple made available without charge and allowed to be freely redistributed until the 2013 release of
  
   OS X Mavericks
  
  . Although System 7 could be purchased from Apple, the cost was nominal and considered to only cover duplication and media. It was perfectly legal to copy a friend's System 7 installation floppies, and it was common for Macintosh dealers to allow customers to use the store's demo machines to copy System 7 install disks for the cost of a box of floppies.
  

    [10]
   

  CD-ROM magazines such as
  
   Nautilus
  
  included System 7 on their disks. After Mac users downloaded thousands of copies of System 7 from the online services (AOL, CompuServe and GEnie), Apple surveyed the services and based on this popularity started selling the Mac OS as a retail product with System 7.1. (System 7.5.3r2 is now available for free from Apple's web site, but was not posted until long after it had been superseded. A System 7.5.5 updater is also available for free download.)
 

         PowerBook 180
        

         Macintosh IIvi
        

  Soon after the initial release of System 7, the 7.0.1 minor update was released in October 1991. A patch called "System 7 Tune-Up" also followed, which fixed the "disappearing files" bug in which the system would lose files
  

    [11]
   

  and added "minimum" and "preferred" memory allotments to an application's Get Info box.
  

    [12]
   

  In August 1992, the 7.1 update was released which incorporated these changes and introduced the Fonts folder. This replaced the often time-consuming method of dragging fonts to and from the System file, introduced in System 7.0; it also replaced the
  
   Font/DA Mover
  
  application from System 6, which could also be used with 7.0.
 
  The first major upgrade was System 7.1.1, also known as "System 7 Pro". This release was a bundle of 7.1 with AppleScript tools,
  
   QuickTime
  
  and
  
   Apple Open Collaboration Environment
  
  (AOCE). While System 7 had some trouble running in slightly older machines due to memory footprint, System 7 Pro barely fit into any Macintosh computers at the time. It was most commonly used for its minor bug fixes rather than its new functionality.
 
  Apple joined the
  
   AIM alliance
  
  (Apple, IBM and Motorola) shortly after the release of System 7 in 1991, and started work on
  
   PowerPC
  
  -based machines that later became the
  
   Power Macintosh
  
  family. Support for these machines resulted in System 7.1.2.
 
  System 7.1.2 was never offered for retail sale; it shipped with the first batches of the PowerPC Macs and a 68k version shipped with a small number of Quadra 600 series systems. Later shipments shipped with System 7.5 instead.
 
  The next major release was
  
   System 7.5
  
  , which included bug fixes from previous updates and added several new features including:
 
  System 7.5 was codenamed "Capone", a reference to
  
   Al Capone
  
  and "Chicago", which was the code name for Microsoft's
  
   Windows 95
  
  , and, in turn, the name of the default system font used in Mac OS until version 8.
 
  System 7.5.1 was primarily a bug fix on 7.5, but also introduced a new "Mac OS" startup screen in preparation for
  
   Mac clones
  
  .
 
  System 7.5.2, released only for the first
  
   PCI
  
  -based Power Macs, was notable for introducing Apple's new networking architecture,
  
   Open Transport
  
  .
 
  System 7.5.3, a major bug-fix update that also included
  
   Open Transport
  
  for other PowerPC-based machines as well as some 68k-based machines. 7.5.3 also made several improvements to the 68k emulator, and added translucent dragging support to the Drag Manager. It was also the first version of
  
   Control Strip
  
  for all Macs. This was also the first version of Mac OS to support
  
   SMP
  
  . (9500/MP)
 
  System 7.5.3 Revision 2 included: performance enhancements; better reliability for PowerBooks using the third-party RAM Doubler program; improved reliability for PowerBook 500, 2300, and 5300 series computers with the PowerPC Upgrade Card; improved reliability when using the Startup Disk control panel; and improved reliability when copying files to 1 GB hard disks.
 
  System 7.5.4 was pulled due to a mistake at Apple, in which some components were not included in the installer.
 
  System 7.5.5 included significant performance improvements for virtual memory and memory management on PowerPC-based Macs, including the elimination of one type 11 error. Also included were a number of reliability improvements, such as fixes for Macs using floppy disks equipped with a DOS compatibility card, improved hard disk access for PowerPC PowerBooks and Performa 5400 through 9500 computers, fixes for Macs that included an Apple TV Tuner or Macintosh TV Remote Control, improvements to LocalTalk and networking (especially for the Performa 5400 and 6400), fixes to system startup for the faster 180 MHz Macs (which included PowerPC 604 or 604e processors), improved reliability when using sound intensive applications on Quadra or Centris computers that contained the PowerPC upgrade card, and improved stability when using multiple background applications and shared printers on a network. System 7.5.5 is also the last System 7 release that can run on 68000-based Macs such as the Macintosh Plus and 24-bit addressing only ROMs such as
  
   Macintosh IIcx
  
  . 7.6 and later required a 68030 processor and 32-bit addressing capable ROM and will automatically turn on 32-bit addressing on boot.
  

    [15]
   


  Mac OS 7.6 (codenamed "Harmony") was the last major update, released in 1997. With 7.6, the operating system was officially called "Mac OS" instead of "System". Mac OS 7.6 introduced several features that were also included in
  
   Mac OS 8
  
  , including a revamped Extensions Manager, more native PowerPC code for Power Macs, more bundled Internet tools and utilities, and a more-stable Finder with increased memory allocation.
  

    [16]
   

  In this version, the PowerTalk feature added in 7.5 was removed due to poor application support, and support for a large number of older Macintosh models was dropped.
 
  The minor update to
  
   Mac OS 7.6.1
  
  finally ported the 68k exception handling routines to PowerPC, turning dreaded type 11 errors into less harmful errors (type 1, 2 or 3, usually) as crashing applications would more often terminate safely instead of crashing the operating system.
  

    [17]
   


  Through this period, Apple had been attempting to release a completely new "modern" operating system, named
  
   Copland
  
  . When the Copland project was abandoned in 1996, Apple announced plans to release an OS update every six months until
  
   Rhapsody
  
  (which would by 2001 evolve into what was released as
  
   Mac OS X
  
  ) shipped.
  

    [18]
   

  Two more releases were shipped, now officially branded as "Mac OS" —
  
   Mac OS 7.6
  
  and the minor bug fix 7.6.1. Future versions were released as
  
   Mac OS 8–8.6
  
  and
  
   Mac OS 9–9.2
  
  .
 
  Apple created and published an "Older Software Downloads" page on their AppleCare Support website on July 17, 2001. Since then, diskette images to install System 7.0, System 7.0.1, and System 7.5.3 as well as the System 7.5.5 Update have been available as free downloads for legacy Macintosh users, as well as for those who wish to use the software through
  
   emulation
  
  of 68k and PowerPC Macintosh hardware. In addition to System 7, related downloads are also
  
   At Ease
  
  downloads and
  
   Mac OS 8
  
  updates. All of the diskette image files are in
  
   MacBinary
  
  format and are accompanied by a descriptive
  
   readme
  
  file.
 