


   macOS
  
  (pronounced
  


     /
     

       ˌ
      

       m
      

       æ
      

       k
      

       oʊ
      

       ɛ
      

       s
      

     /
    


  ;
  

    [5]
   

  previously
  
   Mac OS X
  
  , then
  
   OS X
  
  ) is the current series of
  
   Unix-based
  

   graphical
  

   operating systems
  
  developed and marketed by
  
   Apple Inc.
  
  designed to run on Apple's
  
   Macintosh
  
  computers ("Macs"), having been preinstalled on all Macs since 2002. Within the market of desktop, laptop and home computers, and by web usage, it is the
  
   second most widely used desktop OS
  
  after
  
   Microsoft Windows
  
  .
  

    [6]
   



    [7]
   


  Launched in 2001 as Mac OS X, the series is the latest in the family of
  
   Macintosh operating systems
  
  . Mac OS X succeeded
  
   "classic" Mac OS
  
  , which was introduced in 1984, and the final release of which was
  
   Mac OS 9
  
  in 1999. An initial, early version of the system,
  
   Mac OS X Server 1.0
  
  , was released in 1999. The first desktop version,
  
   Mac OS X 10.0
  
  , followed in March 2001. In 2012, Apple rebranded Mac OS X to OS X. Releases were
  
   code named
  
  after
  
   big cats
  
  from the original release up until
  
   OS X 10.8 Mountain Lion
  
  . Beginning in 2013 with
  
   OS X 10.9 Mavericks
  
  , releases have been named after
  
   landmarks
  
  in
  
   California
  
  .
  

    [8]
   

  In 2016, Apple rebranded OS X to macOS, adopting the
  
   nomenclature
  
  that it uses for their other operating systems,
  
   iOS
  
  ,
  
   watchOS
  
  , and
  
   tvOS
  
  . The latest version of macOS is
  
   macOS 10.12 Sierra
  
  , which was publicly released in September 2016.
 
  macOS is based on technologies developed at
  
   NeXT
  
  between 1985 and 1997, when Apple acquired the company. The "X" in Mac OS X and OS X is pronounced "ten", as it is the
  
   Roman numeral
  
  for the number 10. The X was a prominent part of the operating system's
  
   brand identity
  
  , and was used to showcase its
  
   Unix
  
  compatibility;
  
   UNIX 03
  
  certification was achieved for the
  
   Intel
  
  version of
  
   Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard
  


    [9]
   

  and all releases from
  
   Mac OS X 10.6 Snow Leopard
  
  up to the current version also have UNIX 03 certification.
  

    [10]
   



    [11]
   



    [12]
   



    [13]
   



    [14]
   



    [15]
   



    [16]
   

  macOS shares its Unix-based core, named
  
   Darwin
  
  , and many of its
  
   frameworks
  
  with
  
   iOS
  
  ,
  

    [17]
   


   tvOS
  
  and
  
   watchOS
  
  . A heavily modified version of
  
   Mac OS X 10.4 Tiger
  
  was used for the first-generation
  
   Apple TV
  
  .
  

    [18]
   


  Apple also used to have a
  
   separate line of releases
  
  of Mac OS X designed for
  
   servers
  
  . Beginning with
  
   Mac OS X 10.7 Lion
  
  , the server functions were made available as a separate package on the
  
   Mac App Store
  
  .
 
  Releases of Mac OS X from 1999 to 2005 can run only on the
  
   PowerPC
  
  -based Macs from the time period. After Apple
  
   announced that they were switching to Intel CPUs
  
  from 2006 onwards, a separate version of
  
   Mac OS X 10.4 Tiger
  
  was made and distributed exclusively with early Intel-based Macs; it included an emulator known as
  
   Rosetta
  
  , which allowed users to run most PowerPC applications on Intel-based Macs.
  
   Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard
  
  was released as a
  
   Universal binary
  
  , meaning the installer disc supported both Intel and PowerPC processors. In 2009, Apple released
  
   Mac OS X 10.6 Snow Leopard
  
  , which ran exclusively on Intel-based Macs. In 2011, Apple released
  
   Mac OS X 10.7 Lion
  
  , which no longer supported 32-bit Intel processors and also did not include Rosetta. All versions of the system released since then run exclusively on 64-bit Intel CPUs and do not support PowerPC applications.
 


  The heritage of what would become macOS had originated at
  
   NeXT
  
  , a company founded by
  
   Steve Jobs
  
  following his departure from Apple in 1985. There, the
  
   Unix-like
  

   NeXTSTEP
  
  operating system was developed, and then launched in 1989. The
  
   kernel
  
  of NeXTSTEP is based upon the
  
   Mach kernel
  
  , which was originally developed at
  
   Carnegie Mellon University
  
  , with additional kernel layers and low-level
  
   user space
  
  code derived from parts of
  
   BSD
  
  . Its
  
   graphical user interface
  
  was built on top of an
  
   object-oriented
  

   GUI toolkit
  
  using the
  

    Objective-C
   

  programming language.
 
  Throughout the early 1990s, Apple had tried to create a "next-generation" OS to succeed its
  
   classic Mac OS
  
  through the
  
   Taligent
  
  ,
  
   Copland
  
  and
  
   Gershwin
  
  projects, but all of them were eventually abandoned.
  

    [19]
   

  This led Apple to purchase
  
   NeXT
  
  in 1996, allowing NeXTSTEP, then called
  
   OPENSTEP
  
  , to serve as the basis for Apple's next generation operating system.
  

    [20]
   

  This purchase also led to Steve Jobs returning to Apple as an interim, and then the permanent CEO, shepherding the transformation of the programmer-friendly OPENSTEP into a system that would be adopted by Apple's primary market of home users and creative professionals. The project was first code named "
  
   Rhapsody
  
  " and then officially named Mac OS X.
  

    [21]
   



    [22]
   


  Mac OS X was originally presented as the tenth major version of Apple's operating system for
  
   Macintosh
  
  computers; current versions of macOS retain the major version number "10". Previous Macintosh operating systems (versions of the
  
   classic Mac OS
  
  ) were named using
  
   Arabic numerals
  
  , e.g.
  
   Mac OS 8
  
  and
  
   Mac OS 9
  
  . The letter "X" in Mac OS X's name refers to the number 10, a
  
   Roman numeral
  
  . It is therefore correctly pronounced "ten"
  


     /
     

       ˈ
      

       t
      

       ɛ
      

       n
      

     /
    


  in this context.
  

    [23]
   



    [24]
   

  However, a common mispronunciation is "X"
  


     /
     

       ˈ
      

       ɛ
      

       k
      

       s
      

     /
    


  .
  

    [25]
   


  The first version of Mac OS X,
  
   Mac OS X Server 1.0
  
  , was a transitional product, featuring an interface resembling the
  
   classic Mac OS
  
  , though it was not compatible with software designed for the older system. Consumer releases of Mac OS X included more
  
   backward compatibility
  
  . Mac OS applications could be rewritten to run natively via the
  
   Carbon API
  
  ; many could also be run directly through the
  
   Classic Environment
  
  with a reduction in performance.
 
  The consumer version of Mac OS X was launched in 2001 with
  
   Mac OS X 10.0
  
  . Reviews were variable, with extensive praise for its sophisticated, glossy
  
   Aqua interface
  
  but criticizing it for sluggish performance.
  

    [26]
   

  With Apple's popularity at a low, the makers of several classic Mac applications such as
  
   FrameMaker
  
  and
  
   PageMaker
  
  declined to develop new versions of their software for Mac OS X.
  

    [27]
   



    Ars Technica
   

  columnist John Siracusa, who reviewed every major OS X release up to 10.10, described the early releases in retrospect as 'dog-slow, feature poor' and Aqua as 'unbearably slow and a huge resource hog'.
  

    [26]
   



    [28]
   



    [29]
   


  Apple rapidly developed several new releases of Mac OS X. Siracusa's review of version 10.3,
  
   Panther
  
  , noted "It's strange to have gone from years of uncertainty and
  
   vaporware
  
  to a steady annual supply of major new operating system releases."
  

    [30]
   

  Version 10.4,
  
   Tiger
  
  , reportedly shocked executives at
  
   Microsoft
  
  by offering a number of features, such as fast file searching and improved graphics processing, that Microsoft had spent
  
   several years struggling
  
  to add to
  
   Windows
  
  with acceptable performance.
  

    [31]
   


  In 2006, the first
  
   Intel
  
  Macs released used a specialized version of
  
   Mac OS X 10.4 Tiger
  
  .
  

    [32]
   

  In 2007,
  
   Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard
  
  was the first to run on both PowerPC and Intel Macs with the use of
  
   universal binaries
  
  .
  

    [33]
   


   Mac OS X 10.6 Snow Leopard
  
  was the first version of OS X to drop support for
  
   PowerPC
  
  Macs.
  

    [34]
   


  As the operating system evolved, it moved away from the
  
   classic Mac OS
  
  , with applications being added and removed. Targeting the consumer and media markets, Apple emphasized its new "digital lifestyle" applications such as the
  
   iLife
  
  suite, integrated home entertainment through the
  
   Front Row
  
  media center and the
  
   Safari
  
  web browser.
  

    [35]
   

  With increasing popularity of the internet, Apple offered additional online services, including the .Mac,
  
   MobileMe
  
  and most recently
  
   iCloud
  
  products. It also began selling third-party applications through the
  
   Mac App Store
  
  .
 
  Newer versions of Mac OS X also included modifications to the general interface, moving away from the striped gloss and transparency of the initial versions. Some applications began to use a
  
   brushed metal
  
  appearance, or non-pinstriped titlebar appearance in version 10.4.
  

    [36]
   

  In Leopard, Apple announced a unification of the interface, with a standardized gray-gradient window style.
  

    [37]
   



    [38]
   


  A key development for the system was the announcement and release of the
  
   iPhone
  
  from 2007 onwards. While Apple's previous
  
   iPod
  
  media players used a
  
   minimal
  
  operating system, the iPhone used an operating system based on Mac OS X, which would later be called "iPhone OS" and then
  
   iOS
  
  . The simultaneous release of two operating systems based on the same frameworks placed tension on Apple, which cited the iPhone as forcing it to delay
  
   Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard
  
  .
  

    [39]
   

  However, after Apple opened the iPhone to third-party developers its commercial success drew attention to Mac OS X, with many iPhone software developers showing interest in Mac development.
  

    [40]
   


  In two succeeding versions,
  
   Lion
  
  and
  
   Mountain Lion
  
  , Apple moved some applications to a highly
  
   skeumorphic
  
  style of design inspired by contemporary versions of iOS, at the same time simplifying some elements by making controls such as scroll bars fade out when not in use.
  

    [28]
   

  This direction was, like brushed metal interfaces, unpopular with some users, although it continued a trend of greater animation and variety in the interface previously seen in design aspects such as the
  
   Time Machine
  

   backup
  
  utility, which presented past file versions against a swirling nebula, and the glossy translucent
  
   dock
  
  of
  
   Leopard
  
  and
  
   Snow Leopard
  
  .
  

    [41]
   

  In addition, with
  
   Mac OS X 10.7 Lion
  
  , Apple ceased to release separate
  
   server
  
  versions of Mac OS X, selling server tools as a separate downloadable application through the Mac App Store. A review described the trend in the server products as becoming "cheaper and simpler... shifting its focus from large businesses to small ones."
  

    [42]
   


  In 2012, with the release of
  
   OS X 10.8 Mountain Lion
  
  , the name of the system was shortened from Mac OS X to OS X. That year, Apple removed the head of OS X development,
  
   Scott Forstall
  
  , and design was changed towards a more minimal direction.
  

    [43]
   

  Apple's new user interface design, using deep color saturation, text-only buttons and a minimal, 'flat' interface, was debuted with
  
   iOS 7
  
  in 2013. With OS X engineers reportedly working on iOS 7, the version released in 2013,
  
   OS X 10.9 Mavericks
  
  , was something of a transitional release, with some of the skeumorphic design removed, while most of the general interface of Mavericks remained unchanged.
  

    [44]
   

  The next version,
  
   OS X 10.10 Yosemite
  
  , adopted a design similar to
  
   iOS 7
  
  but with greater complexity suitable for an interface controlled with a mouse.
  

    [45]
   


  From 2012 onwards, the system has shifted to an annual release schedule similar to that of
  
   iOS
  
  . It also steadily cut the cost of updates from Snow Leopard onwards, before removing upgrade fees altogether from 2013 onwards.
  

    [46]
   

  Some journalists and third-party software developers have suggested that this decision, while allowing more rapid feature release, meant less opportunity to focus on stability, with no version of OS X recommendable for users requiring stability and performance above new features.
  

    [47]
   

  Apple's 2015 update,
  
   OS X 10.11 El Capitan
  
  , was announced to focus specifically on stability and performance improvements.
 
  In 2016, with the release of
  
   macOS 10.12 Sierra
  
  , the name was changed from OS X to macOS. macOS 10.12 Sierra's main features are the introduction of
  
   Siri
  
  to macOS, Optimized Storage, improvements to included applications, and greater integration with Apple's
  
   iPhone
  
  and
  
   Apple Watch
  
  . The
  
   Apple File System
  
  was announced at the
  
   Apple Worldwide Developers Conference
  
  in 2016 as a replacement for
  
   HFS Plus
  
  , a highly-criticized file system. This new file system will be implemented at a later date.
  

    [48]
   


  At macOS's core is a
  
   POSIX
  
  compliant operating system built on top of the
  
   XNU
  

   kernel
  
  , with standard Unix facilities available from the
  
   command line interface
  
  . Apple has released this family of software as a
  
   free
  
  and
  
   open source
  
  operating system named
  
   Darwin
  
  . On top of Darwin, Apple layered a number of components, including the
  
   Aqua
  
  interface and the
  
   Finder
  
  , to complete the
  
   GUI
  
  -based operating system which is macOS.
  

    [49]
   


  With its original introduction as Mac OS X, the system brought a number of new capabilities to provide a more stable and reliable platform than its predecessor, the
  
   classic Mac OS
  
  . For example,
  
   pre-emptive multitasking
  
  and
  
   memory protection
  
  improved the system's ability to run multiple applications simultaneously without them interrupting or corrupting each other.
  

    [50]
   

  Many aspects of macOS's architecture are derived from
  
   OPENSTEP
  
  , which was designed to be portable, to ease the transition from one platform to another. For example,
  
   NeXTSTEP
  
  was ported from the original
  
   68k
  
  -based NeXT workstations to
  
   x86
  
  and other architectures before NeXT was purchased by Apple,
  

    [51]
   

  and OPENSTEP was later ported to the
  
   PowerPC
  
  architecture as part of the
  
   Rhapsody project
  
  .
 
  The default macOS
  
   file system
  
  is
  
   HFS+
  
  , which it inherited from the classic Mac OS. Operating system designer
  
   Linus Torvalds
  
  has criticized HFS+, saying it is "probably the worst file system ever", whose design is "actively corrupting user data". He criticized the
  
   case insensitivity
  
  of file names, a design made worse when Apple extended the file system to support
  
   Unicode
  
  .
  

    [52]
   



    [53]
   

  Initially, HFS+ was designed for classic Mac OS, which runs on
  
   big-endian
  

   68K
  
  and
  
   PowerPC
  
  systems. When Apple switched Macintosh to little-endian Intel processors, it continued to use big-endian byte order on HFS+ file systems. As a result, macOS on current Macs must do
  
   byte swap
  
  when it reads file system data.
  

    [54]
   



    [55]
   

  These concerns are being addressed with the new
  
   Apple File System
  
  , which will be included in a later update.
 
  The
  
   Darwin
  
  subsystem in macOS is in charge of managing the file system, which includes the Unix
  
   permissions
  
  layer. In 2003 and 2005, two
  
   Macworld
  
  editors expressed criticism of the permission scheme; Ted Landau called misconfigured permissions "the most common frustration" in macOS, while Rob Griffiths suggested that some users may even have to
  
   reset permissions
  
  every day, a process which can take up to 15 minutes.
  

    [56]
   

  More recently, another Macworld editor, Dan Frakes, called the procedure of repairing permissions vastly overused.
  

    [57]
   

  He argues that macOS typically handles permissions properly without user interference, and resetting permissions should just be tried when problems emerge.
  

    [58]
   


  The architecture of macOS incorporates a layered design:
  

    [59]
   

  the layered frameworks aid rapid development of applications by providing existing code for common tasks.
  

    [60]
   

  Apple provides its own
  
   software development
  
  tools, most prominently an
  
   integrated development environment
  
  called
  
   Xcode
  
  . Xcode provides interfaces to
  
   compilers
  
  that support several
  
   programming languages
  
  including
  
   C
  
  ,
  
   C++
  
  ,
  
   Objective-C
  
  , and
  
   Swift
  
  . For the
  
   Apple–Intel transition
  
  , it was modified so that developers could build their applications as a
  
   universal binary
  
  , which provides compatibility with both the Intel-based and PowerPC-based Macintosh lines.
  

    [61]
   

  First and third-party applications can be controlled programatically using the
  
   AppleScript
  
  framework,
  

    [62]
   

  retained from the
  
   classic Mac OS
  
  ,
  

    [63]
   

  or using the newer
  
   Automator
  
  application that offers pre-written tasks that do not require programming knowledge.
  

    [64]
   


  Apple offered two main
  
   APIs
  
  to develop software natively for macOS:
  
   Cocoa
  
  and
  
   Carbon
  
  . Cocoa was a descendant of APIs inherited from
  
   OPENSTEP
  
  with no ancestry from the
  
   classic Mac OS
  
  , while Carbon was an adaptation of classic Mac OS APIs, allowing Mac software to be minimally rewritten in order to run natively on Mac OS X.
 
  The Cocoa API was created as the result of a 1993 collaboration between
  
   NeXT Computer
  
  and
  
   Sun Microsystems
  
  . This heritage is highly visible for Cocoa developers, since the "NS" prefix is ubiquitous in the framework, standing variously for
  
   N
  
  eXT
  
   S
  
  TEP or
  
   N
  
  eXT/
  

    S
   
   un
  
  . The official OPENSTEP API, published in September 1994, was the first to split the API between Foundation and ApplicationKit and the first to use the "NS" prefix.
  

    [51]
   

  Traditionally, Cocoa programs have been mostly written in
  
   Objective-C
  
  , with Java as an alternative. However, on July 11, 2005, Apple announced that "features added to Cocoa in Mac OS X versions later than 10.4 will not be added to the Cocoa-Java programming interface."
  

    [65]
   

  macOS also used to support the
  
   Java Platform
  
  as a "preferred software package"—in practice this means that applications written in Java fit as neatly into the operating system as possible while still being
  
   cross-platform
  
  compatible, and that graphical user interfaces written in
  
   Swing
  
  look almost exactly like native Cocoa interfaces. Since 2014, Apple has promoted its new programming language
  
   Swift
  
  as the preferred language for software development on Apple platforms.
 
  Apple's original plan with macOS was to require all developers to rewrite their software into the Cocoa APIs. This caused much outcry among existing Mac developers, who threatened to abandon the platform rather than invest in a costly rewrite, and the idea was shelved.
  

    [22]
   



    [66]
   

  To permit a smooth transition from Mac OS 9 to Mac OS X, the
  
   Carbon
  

   Application Programming Interface
  
  (API) was created.
  

    [22]
   

  Applications written with Carbon were initially able to run natively on both classic Mac OS and Mac OS X, although this ability was later dropped as Mac OS X developed. Carbon was not included in the first product sold as Mac OS X: the little-used original release of
  
   Mac OS X Server 1.0
  
  , which also did not include the Aqua interface.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  
  Apple limited further development of Carbon from the release of Leopard onwards, announcing Carbon applications would not receive the ability to run at 64-bit.
  

    [66]
   

  As of 2015, a small number of older Mac OS X apps with heritage dating back to the classic Mac OS still used Carbon, including
  
   Microsoft Office
  
  . Early versions of macOS could also run some classic Mac OS applications through the
  
   Classic Environment
  
  with performance limitations; this feature was removed from 10.5 onwards and all Macs using Intel processors.
 
  Because macOS is
  
   POSIX
  
  compliant, many software packages written for the other
  
   Unix-like
  
  systems such as
  
   Linux
  
  can be recompiled to run on it, including much scientific and technical software.
  

    [67]
   

  Third-party projects such as
  
   Homebrew
  
  ,
  
   Fink
  
  ,
  
   MacPorts
  
  and
  
   pkgsrc
  
  provide pre-compiled or pre-formatted packages. Apple and others have provided versions of the
  
   X Window System
  
  graphical interface which can allow these applications to run with an approximation of the macOS look-and-feel.
  

    [68]
   



    [69]
   



    [70]
   

  The current Apple-endorsed method is the open-source
  
   XQuartz
  
  project; earlier versions could use the
  
   X11
  
  application provided by Apple, or before that the
  
   XDarwin
  
  project.
  

    [71]
   


  Applications can be distributed to Macs and installed by the user from any source and by any method such as downloading (with or without
  
   code signing
  
  , available via an Apple developer account) or through the
  
   Mac App Store
  
  , a marketplace of software maintained by Apple by way of a process requiring the company's approval. Apps installed through the Mac App Store run within a
  
   sandbox
  
  , restricting their ability to exchange information with other applications or modify the core operating system and its features. This has been cited as an advantage, by allowing users to install apps with confidence that they should not be able to damage their system, but also as a disadvantage, by blocking the Mac App Store's use by professional applications that require elevated privileges.
  

    [72]
   



    [73]
   

  Applications without any code signature cannot be run by default except from a computer's administrator account.
  

    [74]
   



    [75]
   


  Apple produces macOS applications, some of which are included and some sold separately. This includes
  
   iWork
  
  ,
  
   Final Cut Pro
  
  ,
  
   Logic Pro
  
  ,
  
   iLife
  
  , and the database application
  
   FileMaker
  
  . Numerous other developers also offer
  
   software for macOS
  
  .
 
  Tools such as
  
   XPostFacto
  
  and patches applied to the installation media have been developed by third parties to enable installation of newer versions of macOS on systems not officially supported by Apple. This includes a number of pre-G3 Power Macintosh systems that can be made to run up to and including Mac OS X 10.2 Jaguar, all G3-based Macs which can run up to and including Tiger, and sub-867 MHz G4 Macs can run Leopard by removing the restriction from the installation DVD or entering a command in the Mac's
  
   Open Firmware
  
  interface to tell the Leopard Installer that it has a clock rate of 867 MHz or greater. Except for features requiring specific hardware (e.g. graphics acceleration or DVD writing), the operating system offers the same functionality on all supported hardware.
 
  As most Mac hardware components, or components similar to those, since the Intel transition are available for purchase,
  

    [78]
   

  some technology-capable groups have developed software to install macOS on non-Apple computers. These are referred to as
  
   Hackintoshes
  
  , a
  
   portmanteau
  
  of the words "hack" and "Macintosh". This violates Apple's
  
   EULA
  
  (and is therefore unsupported by Apple technical support, warranties etc.), but communities that cater to personal users, who do not install for resale and profit, have generally been ignored by Apple.
  

    [79]
   



    [80]
   



    [81]
   

  These self-made computers allow more flexibility and customization of hardware, but at a cost of leaving the user more responsible for their own machine, such as on matter of data integrity or security.
  

    [82]
   


   Psystar
  
  , a business that attempted to profit from selling macOS on non-Apple certified hardware, was sued by Apple in 2008.
  

    [83]
   


  In April 2002, eWeek announced a rumor that Apple had a version of Mac OS X code-named
  
   Marklar
  
  , which ran on
  
   Intel x86
  
  processors. The idea behind Marklar was to keep Mac OS X running on an alternative platform should Apple become dissatisfied with the progress of the
  
   PowerPC
  
  platform.
  

    [84]
   

  These rumors subsided until late in May 2005, when various media outlets, such as
  

    The Wall Street Journal
   



    [85]
   

  and
  
   CNET
  
  ,
  

    [86]
   

  announced that Apple would unveil Marklar in the coming months.
  

    [87]
   



    [88]
   



    [89]
   


  On June 6, 2005, Steve Jobs announced in his keynote address at the annual Apple
  
   Worldwide Developers Conference
  
  that Apple would be making the transition from PowerPC to
  
   Intel
  
  processors over the following two years, and that Mac OS X would support both platforms during the transition. Jobs also confirmed rumors that Apple had versions of Mac OS X running on Intel processors for most of its developmental life. Intel-based Macs would run a new recompiled version of OS X along with
  
   Rosetta
  
  , a
  
   binary translation
  
  layer which enables software compiled for PowerPC Mac OS X to run on Intel Mac OS X machines.
  

    [90]
   

  The system was included with Mac OS X versions up to version 10.6.8.
  

    [91]
   

  Apple dropped support for Classic mode on the new Intel Macs. Third party emulation software such as
  
   Mini vMac
  
  ,
  
   Basilisk II
  
  and
  
   SheepShaver
  
  provided support for some early versions of Mac OS. A new version of Xcode and the underlying command-line compilers supported building
  
   universal binaries
  
  that would run on either architecture.
  

    [92]
   


  PowerPC-only software is supported with Apple's official emulation software,
  
   Rosetta
  
  , though applications eventually had to be rewritten to run properly on the newer versions released for Intel processors. Apple initially encouraged developers to produce universal binaries with support for both PowerPC and Intel.
  

    [93]
   

  There is a performance penalty when PowerPC binaries run on Intel Macs through Rosetta. Moreover, some PowerPC software, such as kernel extensions and System Preferences plugins, are not supported on Intel Macs at all. Some PowerPC applications would not run on macOS at all. Plugins for Safari need to be compiled for the same platform as Safari, so when Safari is running on Intel it requires plug-ins that have been compiled as Intel-only or universal binaries, so PowerPC-only plug-ins will not work.
  

    [94]
   

  While Intel Macs are able to run PowerPC, Intel, and universal binaries; PowerPC Macs support only universal and PowerPC builds.
 
  Support for the PowerPC platform was dropped following the transition. In 2009, Apple announced at its
  
   Worldwide Developers Conference
  
  that Mac OS X 10.6 Snow Leopard would drop support for PowerPC processors and be Intel-only.
  

    [95]
   

  Rosetta continued to be offered as an optional download or installation choice in Snow Leopard before it was discontinued with Mac OS X 10.7 Lion.
  

    [96]
   



    [96]
   

  In addition, new versions of Mac OS X first- and third-party software increasingly required Intel processors, including new versions of iLife, iWork, Aperture and Logic Pro.
 
  One of the major differences between the
  
   classic Mac OS
  
  and the current macOS was the addition of
  
   Aqua
  
  , a graphical user interface with water-like elements, in the first major release of Mac OS X. Every window element, text, graphic, or
  
   widget
  
  is drawn on-screen using
  
   spatial anti-aliasing
  
  technology.
  

    [97]
   


   ColorSync
  
  , a technology introduced many years before, was improved and built into the core drawing engine, to provide color matching for
  
   printing
  
  and
  
   multimedia
  
  professionals.
  

    [98]
   

  Also,
  
   drop shadows
  
  were added around windows and isolated text elements to provide a sense of depth. New interface elements were integrated, including sheets (
  
   dialog boxes
  
  attached to specific windows) and drawers, which would slide out and provide options.
 
  The use of soft edges, translucent colors, and pinstripes, similar to the hardware design of the first
  
   iMacs
  
  , brought more texture and color to the user interface when compared to what
  
   Mac OS 9
  
  and
  
   Mac OS X Server 1.0
  
  's "
  
   Platinum
  
  " appearance had offered. According to John Siracusa, an editor of
  
   Ars Technica
  
  , the introduction of Aqua and its departure from the then conventional look "hit like a ton of bricks."
  

    [99]
   


   Bruce Tognazzini
  
  (who founded the original Apple Human Interface Group) said that the Aqua interface in
  
   Mac OS X 10.0
  
  represented a step backwards in usability compared with the original Mac OS interface.
  

    [100]
   



    [101]
   

  Third-party developers started producing
  
   skins
  
  for customizable applications and other operating systems which mimicked the Aqua appearance. To some extent, Apple has used the successful transition to this new design as leverage, at various times threatening
  
   legal action
  
  against people who make or distribute software with an interface the company says is derived from its
  
   copyrighted
  
  design.
  

    [102]
   


  Apple has continued to change aspects of the macOS appearance and design, particularly with tweaks to the appearance of windows and the menu bar. Since 2012, Apple has sold many of its Mac models with high-resolution
  
   Retina displays
  
  , and macOS and its
  
   APIs
  
  have extensive support for resolution-independent development on supporting high-resolution displays. Reviewers have described Apple's support for the technology as superior to that on Windows.
  

    [103]
   



    [104]
   



    [105]
   


  The
  
   human interface guidelines
  
  published by Apple for macOS are followed by many applications, giving them consistent user interface and keyboard shortcuts.
  

    [106]
   

  In addition, new services for applications are included, which include spelling and grammar checkers, special characters palette, color picker, font chooser and dictionary; these global features are present in every Cocoa application, adding consistency. The graphics system
  
   OpenGL
  
  composites windows onto the screen to allow hardware-accelerated drawing. This technology, introduced in version 10.2, is called
  
   Quartz Extreme
  
  , a component of
  
   Quartz
  
  . Quartz's internal imaging model correlates well with the
  
   Portable Document Format
  
  (PDF) imaging model, making it easy to output PDF to multiple devices.
  

    [98]
   

  As a side result, PDF viewing and creating PDF documents from any application are built-in features.
  

    [107]
   

  Reflecting its popularity with design users, macOS also has system support for a variety of professional video and image formats and includes an extensive pre-installed font library, featuring many prominent brand-name designs.
  

    [108]
   


  The
  
   Finder
  
  is a file browser allowing quick access to all areas of the computer, which has been modified throughout subsequent releases of macOS.
  

    [109]
   



    [110]
   


   Quick Look
  
  is part of the Finder since
  
   version 10.5
  
  . It allows for dynamic previews of files, including videos and multi-page documents without opening any other applications.
  
   Spotlight
  
  , a file searching technology which has been integrated into the Finder since
  
   version 10.4
  
  , allows rapid real-time searches of data files; mail messages; photos; and other information based on item properties (metadata) and/or content.
  

    [111]
   



    [112]
   

  macOS makes use of a
  
   Dock
  
  , which holds file and folder shortcuts as well as minimized windows.
 
  Apple added "Exposé" in
  
   version 10.3
  
  (called
  
   Mission Control
  
  since
  
   version 10.7
  
  ), a feature which includes three functions to help accessibility between windows and desktop. Its functions are to instantly display all open windows as thumbnails for easy navigation to different tasks, display all open windows as thumbnails from the current application, and hide all windows to access the desktop.
  

    [113]
   

  Also,
  
   FileVault
  
  was introduced, which is an optional encryption of the user's files with the 128-bit
  
   Advanced Encryption Standard
  
  (AES-128).
  

    [114]
   


  Features introduced in
  
   version 10.4
  
  include
  
   Automator
  
  , an application designed to create an automatic workflow for different tasks;
  

    [115]
   


   Dashboard
  
  , a full-screen group of small applications called
  
   desktop widgets
  
  that can be called up and dismissed in one keystroke;
  

    [116]
   

  and
  
   Front Row
  
  , a media viewer interface accessed by the
  
   Apple Remote
  
  .
  

    [117]
   

  Moreover, the Sync Services were included, which is a system that allows applications to access a centralized extensible database for various elements of user data, including calendar and contact items. The operating system then managed conflicting edits and data consistency.
  

    [118]
   


  All system icons are scalable up to 512×512 pixels as of
  
   version 10.5
  
  to accommodate various places where they appear in larger size, including for example the
  
   Cover Flow
  
  view, a
  
   three-dimensional
  
  graphical user interface included with
  
   iTunes
  
  , the Finder, and other Apple products for visually skimming through files and digital media libraries via cover artwork. That version also introduced
  
   Spaces
  
  , a
  
   virtual desktop
  
  implementation which enables the user to have more than one desktop and display them in an Exposé-like interface;
  

    [119]
   

  an automatic backup technology called
  
   Time Machine
  
  , which provides the ability to view and restore previous versions of files and application data;
  

    [120]
   

  and
  
   Screen Sharing
  
  was built in for the first time.
  

    [121]
   


  In more recent releases, Apple has developed support for
  
   emoji
  
  characters by including the proprietary
  
   Apple Color Emoji
  
  font.
  

    [122]
   



    [123]
   

  Apple has also connected macOS with social networks such as
  
   Twitter
  
  and
  
   Facebook
  
  through the addition of share buttons for content such as pictures and text.
  

    [124]
   

  Apple has brought several applications and features that originally debuted in
  
   iOS
  
  , its mobile operating system, to macOS in recent releases, notably the
  
   intelligent personal assistant
  

   Siri
  
  , which was introduced in
  
   version 10.12
  
  of macOS.
  

    [125]
   



    [126]
   


  There are 34 system languages available in macOS for the user at the moment of installation; the system language is used throughout the entire operating system environment.
  

    [4]
   

  Input methods for typing in dozens of scripts can be chosen independently of the system language.
  

    [127]
   

  Recent updates have added increasing support for
  
   Chinese characters
  
  and interconnections with popular social networks in
  
   China
  
  .
  

    [128]
   



    [129]
   



    [130]
   



    [131]
   







  macOS can be updated using the
  
   Mac App Store
  
  application or the
  
   softwareupdate
  

   command line
  
  utility. Until
  
   OS X 10.8 Mountain Lion
  
  , a separate
  
   Software Update
  
  application performed this functionality. In Mountain Lion and later, this was merged into the Mac App Store application, although the underlying update mechanism remains unchanged and is fundamentally different than the download mechanism used when purchasing an App Store application.
 
  With the exception of
  
   Mac OS X Server 1.0
  
  and the original public beta, OS X versions were named after
  
   big cats
  
  until
  
   OS X 10.9 Mavericks
  
  , when Apple switched to using
  
   California
  
  locations. Prior to its release,
  
   Mac OS X 10.0
  
  was
  
   code named
  
  "Cheetah" internally at Apple, and
  
   Mac OS X 10.1
  
  was code named internally as "Puma". After the immense buzz surrounding
  
   Mac OS X 10.2
  
  , codenamed "Jaguar", Apple's product marketing began openly using the code names to promote the operating system.
  
   Mac OS X 10.3
  
  was marketed as "Panther",
  
   Mac OS X 10.4
  
  as "Tiger",
  
   Mac OS X 10.5
  
  as "Leopard",
  
   Mac OS X 10.6
  
  as "Snow Leopard",
  
   Mac OS X 10.7
  
  as "Lion",
  
   OS X 10.8
  
  as "Mountain Lion", and
  
   OS X 10.9
  
  as "Mavericks".
 
  "Panther", "Tiger" and "Leopard" are registered as trademarks of Apple, but "Cheetah", "Puma" and "Jaguar" have never been registered. Apple has also registered "Lynx" and "Cougar" as trademarks, though these were allowed to lapse.
  

    [150]
   

  Computer retailer
  
   Tiger Direct
  
  sued Apple for its use of the name "Tiger". On May 16, 2005 a US federal court in the Southern District of Florida ruled that Apple's use did not infringe on Tiger Direct's trademark.
  

    [151]
   


  On September 13, 2000, Apple released a $29.95
  

    [152]
   

  "preview" version of Mac OS X internally codenamed Kodiak in order to gain feedback from users.
 
  The "PB" as it was known marked the first public availability of the Aqua interface and Apple made many changes to the UI based on customer feedback. Mac OS X Public Beta expired and ceased to function in Spring 2001.
  

    [153]
   


  On March 24, 2001, Apple released Mac OS X 10.0 (internally codenamed Cheetah).
  

    [154]
   

  The initial version was slow, incomplete, and had very few applications available at the time of its launch, mostly from independent developers. While many critics suggested that the operating system was not ready for mainstream adoption, they recognized the importance of its initial launch as a base on which to improve. Simply releasing Mac OS X was received by the Macintosh community as a great accomplishment, for attempts to completely overhaul the Mac OS had been underway since 1996, and delayed by countless setbacks. Following some bug fixes,
  
   kernel panics
  
  became much less frequent.
  
   [
   


      citation needed
     


   ]
  

  Later that year on September 25, 2001, Mac OS X 10.1 (internally codenamed Puma) was released. It featured increased performance and provided missing features, such as DVD playback. Apple released 10.1 as a free upgrade CD for 10.0 users, in addition to the US$129 boxed version for people running
  
   Mac OS 9
  
  . It was discovered that the upgrade CDs were full install CDs that could be used with Mac OS 9 systems by removing a specific file; Apple later re-released the CDs in an actual stripped-down format that did not facilitate installation on such systems.
  

    [155]
   

  On January 7, 2002, Apple announced that Mac OS X was to be the default operating system for all Macintosh products by the end of that month.
  

    [156]
   


  On August 23, 2002,
  

    [157]
   

  Apple followed up with Mac OS X 10.2 Jaguar, the first release to use its code name as part of the branding.
  

    [158]
   

  It brought great raw performance improvements, a sleeker look, and many powerful user-interface enhancements (over 150, according to Apple
  

    [159]
   

  ), including
  
   Quartz Extreme
  
  for compositing graphics directly on an
  
   ATI
  

   Radeon
  
  or
  
   Nvidia
  

   GeForce2
  
  MX AGP-based video card with at least 16 MB of VRAM, a system-wide repository for contact information in the new
  
   Address Book
  
  , and an instant messaging client named
  
   iChat
  
  .
  

    [160]
   

  The
  
   Happy Mac
  
  which had appeared during the Mac OS startup sequence for almost 18 years was replaced with a large grey Apple logo with the introduction of Mac OS X v10.2.
 

   Mac OS X v10.3
  
  Panther was released on October 24, 2003. In addition to providing much improved performance, it also incorporated the most extensive update yet to the user interface. Panther included as many or more new features as Jaguar had the year before, including an updated Finder, incorporating a brushed-metal interface,
  
   Fast user switching
  
  ,
  
   Exposé
  
  (Window manager),
  
   FileVault
  
  ,
  
   Safari
  
  , iChat AV (which added
  
   videoconferencing
  
  features to iChat), improved
  
   Portable Document Format
  
  (PDF) rendering and much greater
  
   Microsoft Windows
  
  interoperability.
  

    [161]
   

  Support for some early G3 computers such as "beige" Power Macs and "WallStreet" PowerBooks was discontinued.
  

    [162]
   


  Mac OS X 10.4 Tiger was released on April 29, 2005. Apple stated that Tiger contained more than 200 new features.
  

    [163]
   

  As with Panther, certain older machines were no longer supported; Tiger requires a Mac with 256 MB and a built-in
  
   FireWire
  
  port.
  

    [77]
   

  Among the new features, Tiger introduced
  
   Spotlight
  
  ,
  
   Dashboard
  
  ,
  
   Smart Folders
  
  , updated Mail program with Smart Mailboxes,
  
   QuickTime
  
  7,
  
   Safari
  
  2,
  
   Automator
  
  ,
  
   VoiceOver
  
  ,
  
   Core Image
  
  and
  
   Core Video
  
  . The initial release of the
  
   Apple TV
  
  used a modified version of Tiger with a different graphical interface and fewer applications and services. On January 10, 2006, Apple released the first Intel-based Macs along with the 10.4.4 update to Tiger. This operating system functioned identically on the PowerPC-based Macs and the new Intel-based machines, with the exception of the Intel release dropping support for the Classic environment.
  

    [164]
   


  Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard was released on October 26, 2007. It was called by Apple "the largest update of Mac OS X". It brought more than 300 new features.
  

    [165]
   

  Leopard supports both
  
   PowerPC
  
  - and
  
   Intel x86
  
  -based Macintosh computers; support for the G3 processor was dropped and the G4 processor required a minimum clock rate of 867 MHz, and at least 512 MB of
  
   RAM
  
  to be installed. The single DVD works for all supported Macs (including 64-bit machines). New features include a new look, an updated Finder,
  
   Time Machine
  
  ,
  
   Spaces
  
  ,
  
   Boot Camp
  
  pre-installed,
  

    [166]
   

  full support for
  
   64-bit
  
  applications (including graphical applications), new features in
  
   Mail
  
  and
  
   iChat
  
  , and a number of new security features. Leopard is an
  
   Open Brand UNIX 03
  
  registered product on the Intel platform. It was also the first
  
   BSD-based
  
  OS to receive UNIX 03 certification.
  

    [9]
   



    [167]
   

  Leopard dropped support for the
  
   Classic Environment
  
  and all Classic applications.
  

    [168]
   

  It was the final version of Mac OS X to support the PowerPC architecture.
 
  Mac OS X 10.6 Snow Leopard was released on August 28, 2009. Rather than delivering big changes to the appearance and end user functionality like the previous releases of
  
   Mac OS X
  
  , Snow Leopard focused on "under the hood" changes, increasing the performance, efficiency, and stability of the operating system. For most users, the most noticeable changes were: the disk space that the operating system frees up after a clean install compared to Mac OS X 10.5 Leopard, a more responsive
  
   Finder
  
  rewritten in
  
   Cocoa
  
  , faster
  
   Time Machine
  
  backups, more reliable and user friendly disk ejects, a more powerful version of the Preview application, as well as a faster
  
   Safari
  
  web browser. Snow Leopard only supported machines with Intel CPUs, required at least 1 GB of
  
   RAM
  
  , and dropped default support for applications built for the
  
   PowerPC
  
  architecture (
  
   Rosetta
  
  could be installed as an additional component to retain support for PowerPC-only applications).
  

    [169]
   


  Snow Leopard also featured new
  
   64-bit
  
  technology capable of supporting greater amounts of
  
   RAM
  
  , improved support for multi-core processors through
  
   Grand Central Dispatch
  
  , and advanced GPU performance with
  
   OpenCL
  
  .
  

    [170]
   


  An update introduced support for the
  
   Mac App Store
  
  , Apple's digital distribution platform for macOS applications.
  

    [171]
   


  Mac OS X 10.7 Lion was released on July 20, 2011. It brought developments made in Apple's iOS, such as an easily navigable display of installed applications called
  
   Launchpad
  
  and a greater use of
  
   multi-touch
  
  gestures, to the Mac. This release removed
  
   Rosetta
  
  , making it incompatible with PowerPC applications.
  

    [96]
   


  Changes made to the GUI include auto-hiding scrollbars that only appear when they are being used, and Mission Control which unifies Exposé, Spaces, Dashboard, and full-screen applications within a single interface.
  

    [172]
   

  Apple also made changes to applications: they resume in the same state as they were before they were closed, similar to iOS. Documents auto-save by default.
  

    [173]
   


  OS X 10.8 Mountain Lion was released on July 25, 2012.
  

    [144]
   

  It incorporates some features seen in iOS 5, which include
  
   Game Center
  
  , support for
  
   iMessage
  
  in the new
  
   Messages
  
  messaging application, and Reminders as a to-do list app separate from
  
   iCal
  
  (which is renamed as Calendar, like the iOS app). It also includes support for storing
  
   iWork
  
  documents in
  
   iCloud
  
  .
  

    [174]
   


   Notification Center
  
  , which makes its debut in Mountain Lion, is a desktop version similar to the one in iOS 5.0 and higher. Application pop-ups are now concentrated on the corner of the screen, and the Center itself is pulled from the right side of the screen. Mountain Lion also includes more Chinese features including support for
  
   Baidu
  
  as an option for
  
   Safari
  
  search engine,
  
   QQ
  
  ,
  
   163.com
  
  and 126.com services for
  
   Mail
  
  ,
  
   Contacts
  
  and
  
   Calendar
  
  ,
  
   Youku
  
  ,
  
   Tudou
  
  and
  
   Sina Weibo
  
  are integrated into share sheets.
  

    [131]
   


  Starting with Mountain Lion, Apple software updates (including the OS) are distributed via the
  
   App Store
  
  . This updating mechanism replaced the Apple Software Update utility.
 
  OS X 10.9 Mavericks was released on October 22, 2013. It was a free upgrade to all users running Snow Leopard or later with a 64-bit Intel processor.
  

    [175]
   

  Its changes include the addition of the previously iOS-only
  
   Maps
  
  and
  
   iBooks
  
  applications, improvements to the Notification Center, enhancements to several applications, and many under-the-hood improvements.
  

    [176]
   


  OS X 10.10 Yosemite was released on October 16, 2014. It features a redesigned user interface similar to that of
  
   iOS 7
  
  , intended to feature a more minimal, text-based 'flat' design, with use of translucency effects and intensely
  
   saturated colors
  
  .
  

    [177]
   

  Apple's showcase new feature in Yosemite is Handoff, which enables users with iPhones running iOS 8.1 or later to answer phone calls, receive and send SMS messages, and complete unfinished iPhone emails on their Mac.
 
  OS X 10.11 El Capitan was released on September 30, 2015. Similar to Mac OS X 10.6 Snow Leopard, Apple described this release as containing "refinements to the Mac experience" and "improvements to system performance" rather than new features. Refinements include public transport built into the
  
   Maps
  
  application, GUI improvements to the
  
   Notes
  
  application, adopting
  
   San Francisco
  
  as the system font for clearer legibility, and the introduction of
  
   System Integrity Protection
  
  . The
  
   Metal API
  
  , first introduced in
  
   iOS 8
  
  , was also included in this operating system for "all Macs since 2012".
  

    [178]
   


  During the keynote at
  
   WWDC
  
  on June 13, 2016, Apple announced that OS X would be renamed macOS to stylistically match Apple's other operating systems, such as
  
   iOS
  
  ,
  
   watchOS
  
  , and
  
   tvOS
  
  .
  

    [179]
   


  macOS 10.12 Sierra was released to the public on September 20, 2016. New features include the addition of
  
   Siri
  
  , Optimized Storage, and updates to Photos, Messages, and iTunes.
  

    [180]
   



    [181]
   


  As of July 2016, macOS is the second-most-active general-purpose desktop client operating system in use on the
  
   World Wide Web
  
  following
  
   Microsoft Windows
  
  , with a 4.90% usage share according to statistics compiled by
  
   Wikimedia
  
  . It is the most successful
  
   Unix-like
  
  desktop operating system on the web, estimated at approximately 5 times the usage of
  
   Linux
  
  (which has 1.01%). Usage share generally continues to shift away from the desktop and toward mobile operating systems such as
  
   iOS
  
  and
  
   Android
  
  .
  

    [182]
   


  In its earlier years, Mac OS X enjoyed a near-absence of the types of
  
   malware
  
  and
  
   spyware
  
  that have affected
  
   Microsoft Windows
  
  users.
  

    [183]
   



    [184]
   



    [185]
   

  macOS has a smaller usage share compared to Windows,
  

    [186]
   

  but it also has traditionally more secure
  
   Unix
  
  roots.
  
   Worms
  
  , as well as potential vulnerabilities, were noted in 2006, which led some industry analysts and anti-virus companies to issue warnings that Apple's Mac OS X is not immune to malware.
  

    [187]
   

  Increasing market share coincided with additional reports of a variety of attacks.
  

    [188]
   

  In early 2011, Mac OS X experienced a large increase in malware attacks,
  

    [189]
   

  and malware such as
  
   Mac Defender
  
  , MacProtector, and MacGuard were seen as an increasing problem for Mac users. At first, the malware installer required the user to enter the administrative password, but later versions were able to install without user input.
  

    [190]
   

  Initially, Apple support staff were instructed not to assist in the removal of the malware or admit the existence of the malware issue, but as the malware spread, a support document was issued. Apple announced an OS X update to fix the problem. An estimated 100,000 users were affected.
  

    [191]
   



    [192]
   

  Apple releases security updates for macOS regularly.
  

    [193]
   


  As a devices company, most large-scale Apple promotion for macOS has been part of the sale of Macs, with promotion of macOS updates generally focused on existing users, promotion at
  
   Apple Store
  
  and other retail partners, or through events for developers. In larger scale advertising campaigns, Apple specifically promoted macOS as better for handling media and other home-user applications, and
  
   comparing
  
  Mac OS X (especially versions Tiger and Leopard) with the heavy criticism
  
   Microsoft
  
  received for the long-awaited
  
   Windows Vista
  
  operating system.
  

    [194]
   



    [195]
   

